Remote Sensing of Environment 280 (2022) 113198
Available online 4 August 2022
0034-4257/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/4.0/).
Review 
Multi-sensor spectral synergies for crop stress detection and monitoring in 
the optical domain: A review 
Katja Berger a,b,*, Miriam Machwitz c, Marlena Kycko d, Shawn C. Kefauver e,f, 
Shari Van Wittenberghe a, Max Gerhards g, Jochem Verrelst a, Clement Atzberger h, 
Christiaan van der Tol i, Alexander Damm j,k, Uwe Rascher l, Ittai Herrmann m, 
Veronica Sobejano Paz n, Sven Fahrner l, Roland Pieruschka l, Egor Prikaziuk i, 
Ma. Luisa Buchaillot e,f, Andrej Halabuk o, Marco Celesti p, Gerbrand Koren q, 
Esra Tunc Gormus r, Micol Rossini s, Michael Foerster t, Bastian Siegmann l, Asmaa Abdelbaki g, 
Giulia Tagliabue s, Tobias Hank b, Roshanak Darvishzadeh i, Helge Aasen u,v, Monica Garcia w, 
Isabel Pˆoças x, Subhajit Bandopadhyay y, Mauro Sulis c, Enrico Tomelleri z, Offer Rozenstein aa, 
Lachezar Filchev ab, Gheorghe Stancile ac, Martin Schlerf c 
a Image Processing Laboratory (IPL), University of Valencia, C/Catedr´atico Jos´e Beltr´an 2, Paterna 46980, Valencia, Spain 
b Department of Geography, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at München (LMU), Luisenstr. 37, 80333 Munich, Germany 
c Remote Sensing and Natural Resources Modelling Group, Environmental Research and Innovation Department, Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST), 
41, rue du Brill, L-4422 Belvaux, Luxembourg 
d Department of Geoinformatics Cartography and Remote Sensing, Chair of Geomatics and Information Systems, Faculty of Geography and Regional Studies, University of 
Warsaw, 00-927 Warszawa, Poland 
e Integrative Crop Ecophysiology Group, Plant Physiology Section, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain 
f AGROTECNIO (Center for Research in Agrotechnology), Av. Rovira Roure 191, 25198 Lleida, Spain 
g Earth Observation and Climate Processes, Trier University, 54286 Trier, Germany 
h Institute of Geomatics, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna (BOKU), Peter Jordan Str. 82, 1190 Vienna, Austria 
i Faculty Geo-Information Science and Earth Observation, ITC, University of Twente, the Netherlands 
j Department of Geography, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland 
k Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Überlandstrasse 133, 8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland 
l Institute of Bio- and Geosciences, Plant Sciences (IBG-2), Forschungszentrum Jülich, 52428 Jülich, Germany 
m The Plant Sensing Laboratory, The Robert H. Smith Institute for Plant Sciences and Genetics in Agriculture, The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and 
Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, P.O. Box 12, Rehovot 7610001, Israel 
n Department of Environmental Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
o Institute of Landscape Ecology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, 814 99 Bratislava, Slovakia 
p HE Space for ESA - European Space Agency, European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESA-ESTEC), Keplerlaan 1, 2201, AZ Noordwijk, the Netherlands 
q Copernicus Institute of Sustainable Development, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands 
r Department of Geomatics Engineering, Karadeniz Technical University, 61080 Trabzon, Turkey 
s Remote Sensing of Environmental Dynamics Laboratory (LTDA), University of Milano - Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 1, 20126 Milano, Italy 
t Geoinformation in Environmental Planning Lab, Technische Universit¨at Berlin, 10623 Berlin, Germany 
u Earth Observation and Analysis of Agroecosystems Team, Division Agroecology and Environment, Agroscope, Zurich, Switzerland 
v Institute of Agricultural Science, ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland 
w Research Centre for the Management of Agricultural and Environmental Risks (CEIGRAM), ETSIAAB, Universidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid, 28040, Spain 
x ForestWISE - Collaborative Laboratory for Integrated Forest & Fire Management, Quinta de Prados, Campus da UTAD, 5001-801 Vila Real, Portugal 
y Department of Geography and Environmental Science, University of Southampton, UK 
z Faculty of Science and Technology, Free University of Bozen/Bolzano, Italy 
aa Institute of Soil, Water and Environmental Sciences, Agricultural Research Organization—Volcani Institute, HaMaccabim Road 68, P.O. Box 15159, Rishon LeZion 
7528809, Israel 
ab Space Research and Technology Institute, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences (SRTI-BAS), Bulgaria 
ac National Meteorological Administration, Building A, Soseaua Bucuresti-Ploiesti 97, 013686 Bucuresti, Romania   
* Corresponding author at: Image Processing Laboratory (IPL), University of Valencia, C/Catedr´atico Jos´e Beltr´an 2, Paterna 46980, Valencia, Spain. 
E-mail address: katber@uv.es (K. Berger).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Remote Sensing of Environment 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rse 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2022.113198 
Received 1 April 2022; Received in revised form 8 July 2022; Accepted 25 July 2022   
Remote Sensing of Environment 280 (2022) 113198
2
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Edited by Jing M. Chen  
Keywords: 
Precision agriculture multi-modal solar- 
induced fluorescence satellite hyperspectral 
multispectral biotic and abiotic stress 
A B S T R A C T   
Remote detection and monitoring of the vegetation responses to stress became relevant for sustainable agri­
culture. Ongoing developments in optical remote sensing technologies have provided tools to increase our un­
derstanding of stress-related physiological processes. Therefore, this study aimed to provide an overview of the 
main spectral technologies and retrieval approaches for detecting crop stress in agriculture. Firstly, we present 
integrated views on: i) biotic and abiotic stress factors, the phases of stress, and respective plant responses, and ii) 
the affected traits, appropriate spectral domains and corresponding methods for measuring traits remotely. 
Secondly, representative results of a systematic literature analysis are highlighted, identifying the current status 
and possible future trends in stress detection and monitoring. Distinct plant responses occurring under short- 
term, medium-term or severe chronic stress exposure can be captured with remote sensing due to specific 
light interaction processes, such as absorption and scattering manifested in the reflected radiance, i.e. visible 
(VIS), near infrared (NIR), shortwave infrared, and emitted radiance, i.e. solar-induced fluorescence and thermal 
infrared (TIR). From the analysis of 96 research papers, the following trends can be observed: increasing usage of 
satellite and unmanned aerial vehicle data in parallel with a shift in methods from simpler parametric ap­
proaches towards more advanced physically-based and hybrid models. Most study designs were largely driven by 
sensor availability and practical economic reasons, leading to the common usage of VIS-NIR-TIR sensor com­
binations. The majority of reviewed studies compared stress proxies calculated from single-source sensor do­
mains rather than using data in a synergistic way. We identified new ways forward as guidance for improved 
synergistic usage of spectral domains for stress detection: (1) combined acquisition of data from multiple sensors 
for analysing multiple stress responses simultaneously (holistic view); (2) simultaneous retrieval of plant traits 
combining multi-domain radiative transfer models and machine learning methods; (3) assimilation of estimated 
plant traits from distinct spectral domains into integrated crop growth models. As a future outlook, we recom­
mend combining multiple remote sensing data streams into crop model assimilation schemes to build up Digital 
Twins of agroecosystems, which may provide the most efficient way to detect the diversity of environmental and 
biotic stresses and thus enable respective management decisions.   
1. Introduction 
One of the most challenging concerns of today is finding answers to 
the question “How to feed the world?”, as formulated in the 2nd Sus­
tainable Development Goal (SDG), FAO (2021). The task is huge as the 
world population is expected to increase to 9.8 billion by 2050 (UN, 
2017). Thus, global food production needs to be expanded by 70% in 
order to feed the future population, maintain nutritional security, ac­
count for changing diets and the increasing demand for biological 
products from the construction and energy sectors (Galieni et al., 2021; 
Mueller et al., 2012; Tester and Langridge, 2010). In this context, the 
environmental impact of agriculture must be minimized to protect 
water, climate, soil, and biodiversity resources (Gomiero et al., 2011) 
while reducing production risks for farmers. Climate change is adding 
pressure, as the frequency of extreme weather events as well as major 
shifts in precipitation and temperature patterns are expected to increase 
worldwide (Cogato et al., 2019; Gomiero et al., 2011). As a consequence, 
abiotic (e.g., heat and drought) and/or biotic (e.g., diseases and pests) 
stresses and their combinations (Govender et al., 2009), will also 
become more frequent and lead, without swift and effective manage­
ment responses, to decreases in crop productivity (Atzberger, 2013). 
Thus, early detection of crop stress prior to irreversible damage is 
essential to be able to respond with suitable agrotechnical solutions and 
thus minimize yield loss. 
For the detection and quantification of biotic and abiotic stresses in 
agricultural crops, destructive and non-destructive methods can be used. 
Some quantitative methods provide sensitive analyses of molecules in 
biological systems, also known as high-throughput-omic techniques 
(Fiehn, 2001; Llanes et al., 2018). However, these methods are not only 
destructive but also time-consuming and costly, limiting their use in 
continuous monitoring and scalable research (Galieni et al., 2021). As 
for non-destructive quantitative methods, remote sensing (RS) technol­
ogies have been established, such as imaging spectroscopy, fluorescence 
spectroscopy, thermal and microwave remote sensing, which all provide 
insights into the effects of stress in plants. In contrast to omic techniques, 
RS can be applied at larger spatial scales, with high revisit frequency, 
hence enabling a cost-effective detection of crop stress status and 
spatiotemporal dynamics across cultivated landscapes. Furthermore, RS 
is suitable for global coverage and can thus potentially contribute to 
enhanced food security in developing countries (e.g., Rembold et al., 
2000). 
Driven by new platforms and sensors with enhanced spatial, tem­
poral and spectral capacities, RS studies focusing on agricultural appli­
cations grew exponentially in the last decades (Weiss et al., 2020). 
Together with improvements in computing power and machine learning 
(ML), unprecedented possibilities are offered for precision agriculture 
and other agricultural applications, going along with major improve­
ments in crop stress detection. The most common crop stress type ana­
lysed by means of RS techniques is drought, i.e., water deficit stress 
Damm et al., 2022; Gago et al., 2015; Gerhards et al., 2016; Govender 
et al., 2009; Ihuoma and Madramootoo, 2017; Parkash and Singh, 2020; 
Virnodkar et al., 2020). Also, other stress factors have been studied with 
RS, such as insects (Herrmann et al., 2017) and pathogens (Gold et al., 
2020; Herrmann et al., 2018; Mahlein, 2016; Sishodia et al., 2020) 
nutrient deficiency (Baret et al., 2007; Herrmann et al., 2010; Mahajan 
et al., 2021) or soil contamination (Gholizadeh and Kopackov´a, 2019). 
Optical remote sensing covers the wavelengths from the visible to the 
shortwave infrared (VSWIR, 400–2500 nm) and the thermal infrared 
(TIR, 8–14 μm), collecting radiation reflected and emitted from the 
observed surfaces. When it comes to the detection of plant responses to 
diverse stresses, visible (VIS, 400–700 nm), near-infrared (NIR, 
700–1300 nm) and shortwave infrared (SWIR, 1300–2500 nm) reflec­
tance, but also TIR and solar-induced fluorescence (SIF, often at 687 nm 
and 760 nm, or over the full emission wavelength between 650 and 800 
nm) have been the most exploited passive sensing signals (Gerhards 
et al., 2019). In these spectral domains, information on plant 
morphology and structure can also be derived by means of active sensing 
devices, such as LiDAR (light detection and ranging; Madec et al., 2017), 
and through stereophotogrammetry using multi-spectral imagery (St- 
Onge et al., 2008). Note that this review explicitly excludes microwave 
technologies. Passive microwave remote sensing operates at spatial 
scales (typically at 0.25◦) being too coarse for studies at the farm or field 
scale. Active microwave remote sensing (RADAR) has been shown useful 
in obtaining crop type information (Gella et al., 2021) and surface soil 
moisture, with potentially high relevance for assessing crop water 
availability. However, we restrict this review to crop traits for stress 
K. Berger et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Remote Sensing of Environment 280 (2022) 113198
3
detection and exclude soil attributes. 
Beyond usage of single RS domains, observations in multiple spectral 
domains are strongly suggested, potentially providing a deeper under­
standing of the complex interactions of stressors and affected crop traits 
(Damm et al., 2018; Jiao et al., 2021). Optical multi-sensor synergies for 
stress-related research in agriculture have been identified for precision 
agriculture (Chaerle et al., 2006; Gerhards et al., 2019; Maes and Steppe, 
2019), but also for plant breeding projects (Herrmann et al., 2020; 
Pineda et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2017a). The syner­
gistic use of data from various electromagnetic domains goes back to the 
launch of the Thematic Mapper (TM) onboard Landsat-4 in 1982. 
However, the rather coarse spectral and spatial resolutions of the sensor 
and its successors prevented a deeper look into plant conditions at sub- 
field scales. By the end of the 1990s, plant scientists promoted near- 
range sensing for single leaves and plants using thermography, VIS 
and NIR, as well as fluorescence imaging, to improve understanding of 
plant physiological states and related stresses (Chaerle and Van Der 
Straeten, 2000; Lichtenthaler et al., 1998), but challenges in precise 
image alignment and data calibration prevented synergistic usage of 
such multi-domain data. First synergistic use of multi-domain acquisi­
tions has been realized using piloted aircraft (Gerhards et al., 2018; 
Mohammed et al., 2019; Panigada et al., 2014) while miniaturization in 
sensor design has led to the development of drone systems allowing for 
multi-sensor integration at the field level (Aasen et al., 2018). For the 
first time, the FLuorescence EXplorer-Sentinel 3 (FLEX-S3) tandem 
mission will provide concurrent observations of VIS, NIR, SWIR and TIR 
along with SIF at satellite level. (e.g., Drusch et al., 2017). 
Recent studies propose efficient early stress detection using multi- 
scale UAVs and satellite observations. Within such frameworks, the 
advantages of both platforms can be explored, such as the availability of 
higher temporal and spatial resolution data (Alvarez-Vanhard et al., 
2021; Sagan et al., 2019). However, the integration of multi-scale ap­
proaches goes beyond the scope of this review, which is explicitly con­
strained to synergistic exploitation of multiple spectral domains for 
stress detection in agriculture. 
While the developments in sensor and airborne platform technolo­
gies allow for coincident recordings from multiple (spectral) domains (e. 
g., Timmermans et al., 2015), studies exploring these data by applying 
integrative methods to assess plant stress are still rare. Before a multi- 
domain retrieval approach can be defined, all acquired remotely 
sensed signals must be translated into meaningful values (proxies) 
related to stress (i.e. affected plant traits). In this respect, a multitude of 
modeling and retrieval approaches have been investigated (Verrelst 
et al., 2015, 2019a). The majority of proposed methods relied on para­
metric regressions, i.e. use of spectral bands, vegetation indices (VIs) or 
spectral ratios and their relationships with functional traits linked to 
plant stress (e.g. Gerhards et al., 2016; Govender et al., 2009; Herrmann 
et al., 2020). To better understand cause–effect relationships, and to 
simultaneously use the full set of spectral variables, physically-based 
methods opened attractive pathways. For instance, a promising 
approach is provided by the soil-canopy observation, photochemistry 
and energy fluxes (SCOPE) model (Van der Tol et al., 2009; Yang et al., 
2021a) and its vertically heterogeneous versions mSCOPE (Yang et al., 
2017b) and senSCOPE (Pacheco-Labrador et al., 2021), which combines 
radiative transfer approaches with photosynthesis and energy balance 
modeling. In contrast to physically-based approaches, other studies 
investigated methods of reduced complexity but increased efficiency via 
implementation of data-driven approaches, in particular ML regression 
algorithms (Gewali et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2016; Virnodkar et al., 
2020). To provide a scientific foundation to the pros and cons of 
different approaches, Sishodia et al. (2020) recently reviewed stress- 
related applications of RS in precision agriculture, including water 
stress and disease detection. The authors stated that advanced ap­
proaches using process-based physical models should be pursued to 
complement ML regression algorithms, as for instance demonstrated by 
Reichstein et al. (2019) in the context of surface energy balance (SEB) 
modeling. A pioneering example is provided by Zarco-Tejada et al. 
(2018) who used multi-sensor acquisitions (airborne hyperspectral and 
thermal) to analyse trees undergoing early stress caused by infection 
with the vector-transmitted bacterial plant pathogen Xylella Fastidiosa. 
The authors estimated fluorescence efficiency by exploring a three- 
dimensional radiative transfer model (RTM) in a multi-step inversion 
scheme. Also, thermal stress indicators were derived, and canopy 
structural and leaf biochemical traits were estimated from RTM inver­
sion. In addition, narrow-band spectral indices known to be sensitive to 
certain functional plant traits (i.e., chlorophylls, carotenes and xantho­
phylls) were calculated. All traits and indicators were processed within a 
multivariate analysis based on ML algorithms for the classification of the 
(pre-visual) disease incidence and severity at the landscape scale. 
Another example of early stress detection by multiple spectral domains 
is provided by Hern´andez-Clemente et al. (2019). The authors reviewed 
the capability of remotely sensed physiological indicators, such as can­
opy temperature, chlorophyll fluorescence, photosynthesis and pig­
ments to monitor the early responses of plants to a variety of stressors. 
They pointed towards the main challenges for the RS community in 
detecting stress, being: (1) the availability of high spatial, spectral and 
temporal resolution data, (2) the validation of diverse retrieval methods, 
(3) upscaling of physiological traits from leaf to canopy-level, and (4) 
capturing the temporal dynamics and interaction of traits as stress 
proxies. 
Altogether, despite these advances, critical knowledge and method­
ological gaps for crop stress detection remain. The main gap is that 
currently no concept exists that uses multiple spectral domains in an 
integrated way for a complete view of crop conditions to differentiate 
between crop stress types and to understand the degree of stress severity. 
This shortcoming can be addressed by leveraging the full potential of 
spectral information provided by multi-domain RS data sources in a 
synergistic way. Therefore, we aim to elaborate and propose a new 
methodological concept for the assessment of multiple plant stresses in 
agriculture through optical RS synergies. To achieve this, we review, 
synthesize and integrate current knowledge across spectral domains, 
remote sensing platforms and retrieval methods for the identification of 
crop stress. 
The paper is organized as follows: in Chapter 2, we present a general 
introduction on plant stress, physiological strain as well as adaptations 
to stress at different temporal stages. This is followed by RS of stress 
using distinct proxies and sensor systems in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 con­
centrates on the systematic literature review about multi-domain and 
multi-sensor studies, and Chapter 5 elaborates the proposed multi- 
sensor synergy concept. 
2. Stress definitions and physiology 
2.1. Stress definitions 
Plants are sessile organisms exposed to biotic and abiotic pressures, i. 
e. the physical, chemical and biological environment characterizing 
their habitat (Jones and Jones, 1989). Abiotic stress includes, among 
others, radiation, salinity, flooding (waterlogging), water stress, tem­
perature extremes, nutrient shortage and heavy metals (Gull et al., 2019; 
Larcher, 2003). Second, plants are influenced by their biotic surround­
ings, referring to other co-occurring organisms. Specifically, biotic stress 
involves inter- and intra-specific competitions as well as diseases caused 
by fungal and bacterial pathogens (Lichtenthaler, 1996), weeds, insect 
pests and/or damage to plants by nematodes, protists, viruses, and vi­
roids (Madani et al., 2019). 
Both the biotic and abiotic interactions can impact the survival or 
success of plant species. Thus, understanding the impacts of different 
stress factors on plants have been the focus of plant physiologists 
(Larcher, 2003), particularly important in crop sciences (Blum, 2016). In 
general terms, plant stress can be defined according to Lichtenthaler 
(1996) as: ‘any unfavourable condition or substance that affects or blocks a 
K. Berger et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Remote Sensing of Environment 280 (2022) 113198
4
plant’s metabolism, growth or development’. 
A simplified description of the effect of various stress factors on a 
plant is outlined in Fig. 1 (Blum, 2016; Kranner et al., 2010). Accord­
ingly, plants respond to a changing environment by a coordinated short- 
term acclimation. The response is initiated by biochemical triggers like 
phytohormones or enzymes and leads to a damage and repair cycle, 
activating the plant metabolism usually with small or non-visible 
phenotypic adaptation (reversible and adaptive strain tolerance). With 
increased severity and duration of the stress exposure, plants change 
their phenotypic expressions through long-term adaptations. This af­
fects, for instance, leaf size and thickness, stomatal density, or function 
of chloroplasts depending on high or low light conditions. Depending on 
the stress factor, the adaptation may take days or weeks, while persistent 
and severe (long-term) stress may arise in the final stage and even lead to 
apoptosis (Lichtenthaler, 1996). The ability of plants to vary their 
phenotypic expression in response to environmental conditions is also 
described as “phenotypic plasticity” (Sultan, 2000), which can result in 
altered phenotypic traits and fluxes. 
It has to be noted that the impact of any stress factor usually results in 
a complex interplay between the plant’s genes and its environment often 
leading to multiple strains, not explicitly shown in Fig. 1. For example, 
high light stress affects fluorescence parameters, impacts photosyn­
thesis, increases non-photochemical quenching (NPQ), and enhances 
leaf temperature leading to increased transpiration and changes in leaf 
angle. Likewise, it must be remarked that the effect of a single and/or 
multiple stress factors, as well as the combination of biotic and/or 
abiotic stresses, can often lead to very similar physiological responses in 
the plants (Blum, 2016; Kranner et al., 2010), see Fig. 1. 
It is also important to consider the timing of stress impacts. For 
example, short-term environmental changes may be reflected in 
changing flux rates of photosynthesis, respiration, and transpiration 
(Damm et al., 2018). Stress occurring over long-term periods during 
different development stages may affect growth variously. For example, 
drought stress in wheat may affect leaf expansion in the initial phase, the 
number of tillers in the tillering phase, plant height in the stem elon­
gation phase, and grain development during the flowering stage, with 
the period between stem elongation and flowering being the most 
sensitive to drought (Sarto et al., 2017). 
2.2. Stages of plant stress responses 
Reactions to biotic and abiotic stresses usually are continuous but 
often also non-linear processes (Kranner et al., 2010). In general, three 
phases of the plant stress response may be identified with respect to the 
severity and duration of one or multiple stressors. We exemplary 
demonstrate the phases (or stages) of drought stress and subsequent 
plant response in Fig. 2. very mild drought stress usually has little impact 
on the plant, i.e., initial stomatal closure may occur, but the photosyn­
thetic capacity remains high and no phenotypic changes are observed. 
Under increasing stress levels, however, stomatal closure reduces the 
internal CO2 availability, which often triggers the production of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) and lowers the photosynthetic rates. Moreover, 
leaf temperature increases and changes in leaf angle or leaf rolling are 
observed. As a result, plant growth may be inhibited. A stronger 
decrease in water availability will result in a reduced stomatal 
conductance affecting the leaf turgor (Abdullah et al., 2019). Over­
production and accumulation of ROS and membrane instability will lead 
to cellular damage beyond repair and thus to necrotic spots. Under se­
vere drought stress, growth usually stops, and continuous damage may 
eventually lead to apoptosis (see Fig. 1, Fig. 2). 
These stress phases may vary for diverse or combined stressors. This 
is particularly important for agriculture, where often even mild stress 
may reduce crop growth, and finally the yield, particularly when it oc­
curs at crucial growth stages (Fahad et al., 2017). Consequently, it is 
essential to detect and quantify crop stress at the earliest possible stage. 
Only responses affecting the biophysical and functional properties 
and thus, traits of the plants may be detected by RS. Stress factors such as 
water scarcity, water logging, salinity, heat and excessive light often 
induce changes in the rates of photosynthesis, respiration, transpiration 
and stomatal conductance in the early stress stage. This is usually fol­
lowed by changes in amounts and ratios of the photosynthetic pigments 
(chlorophylls and carotenoids), and the concentration of different me­
tabolites at later stages (Lichtenthaler, 1996). While the remote detec­
tion of altered phenotypic traits, such as pigments and water content, is 
B i o t i c  o r  a b i o t i c  s t r e s s o r ( s )
mild strain 
severe strain 
Adaptive strain resistance 
(tolerance / avoidance)
Signals
(hormone and enzyme responses)
Dehydration and turgor loss
Membrane instability
Signals
(hormone and enzyme responses)
plant-specific 
stress tolerance
Constitutive strain resistance 
(tolerance / avoidance)
Early responses 
Constitutive responses 
A l t e r e d  f l u x e s  a n d  t r a i t s
Apoptosis to strain
(plant death or survival)
Signals
(accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS))
Fig. 1. Scheme of plant stress, strain, and signaling, leading to plant responses and resistance. Adapted from (Blum, 2016).  
K. Berger et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Remote Sensing of Environment 280 (2022) 113198
5
prevalent when monitoring medium-term, mild long-term and severe or 
chronic stress, altered photosynthesis and transpiration fluxes and their 
possible feedback mechanisms already show subtle responses under the 
first occurring stress (e.g., Gerhards et al., 2016; Jonard et al., 2020). In 
fact, daily occurring cycles of stress are common for crops as diurnal 
cycles in radiation and temperature show strong variation, often 
reaching excessive energy inputs at solar noon. In general, electromag­
netic energy absorbed by plants is used to fuel photosynthesis, but under 
excessive irradiation the photosynthetic apparatus needs to immediately 
adapt energy pathways to avoid photo-damage. Increasing stress that 
inhibits the photosynthetic light reactions induces an increasing dissi­
pation of energy by NPQ and reduces the fluorescence yield. The latter is 
detectable over vast vegetated areas as solar-induced fluorescence (SIF), 
a subtle energy flux emitted by vegetation that may be used to detect the 
onset and progress of stress (Aˇc et al., 2015; Demmig-Adams et al., 2020; 
Gerhards et al., 2019). Dynamic adjustments under early stress are also 
observed for transpiration, an energy-demanding process that decreases 
leaf surface temperature. Therefore, sensing the canopy surface tem­
perature became a useful tool for assessing early changes in plant-water 
and plant-health status (Idso et al., 1981; Jackson et al., 1988; Maes and 
Steppe, 2012). 
2.3. Common symptoms of crop stress 
In the following, we describe the causalities and illustrate several 
examples of stress occurrence in crops (Fig. 3). 
Biotic stress responses result from complex interactions between 
plants and other biological organisms and can be very diverse. Often 
plant responses are induced directly by the biotic agents. For instance, in 
the (common) case of herbivory (see Fig. 3(a)), the immediate effect is 
loss of water content due to wounding and loss of functional leaf area 
combined with the necrosis of the wounded leaf parts (Meza-Canales 
et al., 2017). In this way, biotic pathogens often affect a plant locally and 
then induce a systemic plant response. This may include the activation 
of signal pathways to reduce stomatal conductance (Aldea et al., 2005) 
or increased production of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) as 
defence mechanisms (Holopainen and Gershenzon, 2010; Kessler, 
2001). 
Viruses can also lead to biotic stress as shown in Fig. 3(b) for an 
example of Maize Lethal Necrosis (MLN). MLN causes mostly pigment 
damage but also some structural wilting in advanced stages due to ne­
crosis and viral replication related to phosphorous deficiencies. 
A broad diversity in fungal pathogens exists. Some pathogens, such 
as yellow rust, can stimulate photosynthesis during early infection 
stages as the fungus benefits from the increase in sugar production 
(Chang et al., 2013). However, at a later stress stage it may cause de­
creases in photosynthetic capacity, leading to visible foliar lesions 
(Vergara-Diaz et al., 2015). The diversity of fungal pathogens may cause 
plant diseases, such as anthracnose, leaf spot, rust, or wilt (for an 
overview, see Jain et al. (2019)). Many of these diseases are manifested 
as changes in optical reflectance properties of the canopy, which may be 
specific to the pathogen. Such changes in optical properties can either be 
detected as radiometric changes or can be identified at leaf level through 
computer vision approaches for classification of plant diseases (Singh 
et al., 2020). Similar symptoms can be caused by microbes, as shown in 
the example of downy mildew in Fig. 3(c). 
Radiation stress or excessive exposure to ultraviolet (UV) sunlight 
also disturbs plant growth when the absorbed excess energy cannot 
dissipate. It results in an overproduction of ROS that may be detoxified 
or eventually disturb the overall cellular homeostasis of the plant (Singh 
et al., 2020). In Fig. 3(d), the effects of radiation stress are shown for an 
exemplary vineyard. 
As illustrated in Fig. 3(e), frost or cold stress is another serious threat 
to crops (Yadav, 2010). Moderate cold stress reduces plant growth and 
Fig. 2. Biotic and abiotic stress factors and the plants’ responses to stress as a function of dose and exposure time: early (mild), medium-term or mild long-term, and 
severe/chronic exposure. 
K. Berger et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
