Review
Crop reﬂectance monitoring as a tool for water
stress detection in greenhouses: A review
Nikolaos Katsoulas a,b,*, Angeliki Elvanidi a, Konstantinos P. Ferentinos b,
Murat Kacira c, Thomas Bartzanas b, Constantinos Kittas a,b
a Department of Agriculture, Crop Production & Rural Environment, University of Thessaly, Volos, Greece
b Institute for Research & Technology e Thessaly, Centre for Research and Technology e Hellas, Volos, Greece
c Department of Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United States
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 5 July 2016
Received in revised form
22 September 2016
Accepted 4 October 2016
Published online 24 October 2016
Keywords:
Reﬂectance index
Vegetation indices
Remote sensing
Water status
Nutrient status
Multisensory platforms for remote sensing measurements offer the possibility to monitor in
real-time the crop health status without affecting the crop and environmental conditions. The
concept of the speaking plant approach, and plant response based sensing in general, could be
valuable providing a better understanding of the interactions between the microclimate and
the physical conditions of the plants. Early detection of plant stress is critical, especially in
intensive production systems, in order to minimise both acute and chronic loss of produc-
tivity. Non-contact and non-destructive sensing techniques can continuously monitor plants
and enable automated sensing and control capabilities. This paper reviews past research and
recent advances regarding the sensors and approaches used for crop reﬂectance measure-
ments and the indices used for crop water and nutrient status detection. The most practical
and effective indices are those based on ground reﬂectance sensors data which are evaluated
in terms of their efﬁciency in detecting plant water status under greenhouse conditions. Some
possible applications of this approach are summarised. Although crop reﬂectance measure-
ments have been widely used under open ﬁeld conditions, there are several factors that limit
the application of reﬂectance measurements under greenhouse conditions. The most prom-
ising type of sensors and indices for early stress detection in greenhouse crops are presented
and discussed. Future research should focus on real time data analysis and detection of plant
water stress using advanced data analysis techniques and to the development of indices that
may not be affected by plant microclimate.
© 2016 IAgrE. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1.
Introduction
1.1.
Background
Plant stress is caused by biotic or abiotic factors that adversely
affect plant growth and signiﬁcantly reduces productivity.
Plant stress is expressed in the plant canopy in many types of
symptoms. Water stress, for example, closes stomata and
impedes
photosynthesis
and
transpiration,
resulting
in
changes in leaf colour and temperature (Nilsson, 1995, p. 146)
but other symptoms of water stress include morphological
changes such as leaf curling or wilting due to loss of cell
turgidity. Early detection of plant stress is very critical
* Corresponding author. Department of Agriculture Crop Production & Rural Environment, University of Thessaly, Volos, Greece.
E-mail address: nkatsoul@uth.gr (N. Katsoulas).
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/issn/15375110
b i o s y s t e m s e n g i n e e r i n g 1 5 1 ( 2 0 1 6 ) 3 7 4 e3 9 8
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2016.10.003
1537-5110/© 2016 IAgrE. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
especially in intensive production systems in order to mini-
mise both acute and chronic loss of productivity.
Plant water stress may be the result of a single parameter
or a combination of environmental conditions (e.g. air tem-
perature, relative humidity, solar radiation intensity, air ve-
locity) root conditions (e.g. available water in the root,
electrical conductivity in the root zone), the microclimate and
plant genetic traits. Methods such as substrate water content
(for soilless crops) or soil water tension, leaf water potential
and sap ﬂow, among others, have been widely used to help
describe plant water status. However, soil or substrate water
content indicates the availability of water in the root zone and
that is not always directly correlated with the water status of
the plant. In addition, although leaf water potential and sap
ﬂow measurements provide direct information about plant
water status, they require plant contact or destructive sam-
pling which is difﬁcult to realise in commercial scale. Non-
contact and non-destructive sensing techniques can contin-
uously monitor plants and enable automated sensing and
control capabilities (Ling, Giacomelli, & Russell, 1996).
The dynamic response of plants to the changes of their
environment is often called ‘speaking plant’ (Takakura, Kozai,
Tachibana, & Jordan, 1974). The concept of the speaking plant
approach and plant response e based sensing is valuable to
have a better understanding of the interactions between the
microclimate and the physical conditions of the plants
(Kacira, Sasae, Okushima,
&
Ling, 2005).
Thus, in
this
approach, the physical responses of the plants to the envi-
ronmental changes are monitored and the information is
utilised to identify conditions which put plants under stress
Nomenclature
ARVI
Atmospherically resistant vegetation index
AVI
Average vegetation index
C
Sensors that measure plant reﬂectance in contact
with the leaf
ChF
Chlorophyll ﬂuorescence
Chl
Chlorophyll content
CO2
Carbon dioxide
CWSI
Crop water stress index
DVI
Difference vegetation index
ETc
Crop evapotranspiration
EVI
Enhanced vegetation index
eNDVI
Enhanced normalised difference vegetation index
F
Fluorescence
FOV
Field of view
FR
Fluorescence ratio
Fwbi
Floating position water band index
GNDV
Green normalised difference vegetation
GNDVI
Normalised difference vegetation index on
greenness
gs
Stomatal conductivity
GVI
Green vegetation index
LAI
Leaf area index
LED
Light emitting diode
MIR
Middle infrared region
mNDVI
Modiﬁed normalised difference vegetation index
MNDVI8 Modiﬁed normalised difference vegetation index
Macc01
Maccioni index
D
Derivative Reﬂectance at D690
DD
Datt Derivative
mrNDVI Modiﬁed red edge normalised difference
vegetation index
mrSRI
Modiﬁed red edge simple ratio index
MSI
Moisture stress index
MTCI
Merris terrestrial chlorophyll index
N
Nitrogen
ND
Normalised difference
NDII
Normalised difference infrared index
NDVI
Normalised difference vegetation index
NDWI
Normalised difference vegetation index
NIR
Near infrared region
NPh
Non phosphorylated thylakoids
NPQI
Normalised phaeophytinization index
NPQ
Non photochemical quenching
NWI
Normalised water index
OSAVI
Optimization soil adjusted vegetation
PAR
Photosynthetic active radiation
PRI
Photochemical reﬂectance index
PSII
Photosystem II
PSRI
Plant senescence reﬂectance index
PWC
Plant water content
RI
Reﬂectance index
rNDVI
Red edge normalised difference vegetation index
rNDVI
Red normalised difference vegetation index
RS/CAM Remote sensing based on imaging systems
RS/FOV
Remote sensing based on spectroradiometer that
measures in speciﬁc ﬁeld of view of the target
RS
Remote sensing
RVI
Red vegetation index
RWC
Relative water content
SAVI
Soil adjusted vegetation index
SB
Single band
SIPI
Structure independent pigment index
SIWSI
Shortwave infrared water stress index
sNDVI
Similar normalised difference vegetation index
Sp
Spectroradiometer in laboratory
sPRI
Similar photochemical reﬂectance index
SR
Simple ratio
SR
Simple ratio
SWC
Soil water content
Tc
Canopy temperature
TCARI
Transformed chlorophyll absorption in
reﬂectance index
VI
Vegetation index
VIS
Visible spectrum
VOG REI Vogelman red edge index
VPD
Vapour pressure deﬁcit
WI
Water index
Y
Yield
DPRI
Delta photochemical reﬂectance index
b i o s y s t e m s e n g i n e e r i n g 1 5 1 ( 2 0 1 6 ) 3 7 4 e3 9 8
375
and to avoid the occurrence of these conditions or control
greenhouse microclimate to achieve more efﬁcient and
optimal production.
Up to now, in most of the greenhouses climate control has
been based on air temperature and relative humidity mea-
surements carried out at a suitable representative single point
located at the centre of the greenhouse, assuming complete
homogeneity of greenhouse microclimate. However, this
assumption is not valid in most greenhouses and particularly
in present greenhouses since their size has greatly increased
over the recent decades. Climate characterisations show that
even in well-designed greenhouses large temperature gradi-
ents exist, for instance in a pad and fan-cooled greenhouse
with length longer than 40 m, the air temperature gradients
from pad to fan distance can be as high as 5
C (Kittas,
Bartzanas, & Jaffrin, 2003). These large temperature gradi-
ents not only cause non-uniform production and quality, but
can also induce pest and diseases infestations (Fatnassi,
Chaouachi, & Klibi, 2015). That is why some climate control
systems suggest the installation of sensors in several posi-
tions inside the greenhouse or to manually perform mea-
surements in different positions to adjust control strategies.
The greenhouse microclimate (air temperature, humidity
and velocity) and crop (crop transpiration, stomatal and
aerodynamic conductance) physiological response vary over
different locations in the greenhouse not only due to the
variation of outside weather conditions but also to the
greenhouse climate control systems per se, i.e. by the use of
heating, insulation, ventilation or cooling systems. Thus,
direct and real-time monitoring of plant responses and pro-
cesses along with monitoring of the local microclimate pa-
rameters can help to improve climate control and overall
production.
For commercial production systems, it is more advanta-
geous to develop a real-time plant canopy health, growth and
quality monitoring system with multi-sensor platforms. This
can be achieved by a sensing system equipped with a multi-
sensor platform moving over the canopy and ultimately
using plants as ‘sensors’ to communicate their true status and
needs. Such systems could be used to detect crop deviations
from normal development and crop stress.
1.2.
Machine vision
Computer vision is a non-contact and non-destructive sensing
technology that enables multi-dimensional sensing capabil-
ities (Kacira & Ling, 2001). This technology can be used to
extract various information from a targeted object including
morphological (size, shape, texture), spectral (colour, tem-
perature, moisture), and temporal data (growth rate, devel-
opment, dynamic change of spectral and morphological
states) (Story & Kacira, 2015).
Knowing the value-added beneﬁts of the real-time plant
monitoring systems, researchers have paved the way for the
commercialisation of robotic machine vision systems to be
implemented within greenhouses. To this effort, Bonstema
(2015) developed the “SWEEPER” (http://www.sweeper-robot.
eu) greenhouse harvesting robot, in which a side view image
of the canopy is taken by a colour camera. Priva (De Lier,
The
Netherlands)
(http://www.priva-international.com/)
developed the Priva TopCrop Monitor that visualises crop ac-
tivity in the greenhouse based on plant temperature mea-
surements and estimations of plant transpiration. As noted by
Story and Kacira (2015), the HortiMaX (http://www.hortimax.
com) CropView system allows the grower to capture images
of a single location in their plant canopy 24 h a day, 7 days a
week and time-stamped the images to corresponding green-
house climatic data and events. The grower can only view a
handful of plants within the image, not the entire plant can-
opy. Also this system does not extract plant or canopy fea-
tures to quantitatively determine overall plant growth and
status over time. In other words, if there is a plant-related
problem, the trend of this issue is not identiﬁed until the
grower visually identiﬁes the problem themselves, and this
detection approach may not be timely.
The interaction of sunlight with crop canopies and plant
leaves can be used to obtain valuable information about the
plant growth and health status. Changes in plant colour,
morphology, thermal features can be indicative of plant dis-
ease or stresses. Therefore, monitoring the crop and analysing
these features in real time and providing qualitative and
quantitative information to the growers can help them pre-
vent damage to the crops and optimize resource use leading to
improved overall production quality.
1.3.
Basics in plant reﬂectance
Despite the fact that plant leaves often look similar, they vary
widely in both shape and chemical composition, as far as the
concentration of water in the leaf intercellular spaces is con-
cerned. This results in continuously varied plant reﬂectance.
Plant leaves absorb the majority of radiance in the visible band
by plant pigments located in mesophyll (Fig. 1a) such as
chlorophyll and xanthophylls, but reﬂect mostly in the near-
infrared (NIR) band. In addition, water content in sponge
cavities, carbon content in different forms (sugar, starch,
cellulose and lignin) in mesophyll cells and nutrient com-
pounds (N, P, K) in mesophyll cells and palisade parenchyma
also affect leaf spectral properties.
Several authors (e.g. Datt, 1999; Grant, Brothers, & Bogan,
1987; Hodanova, 1985; Jackson & Huete, 1991; Jacquemoud &
Baret, 1990; Jacquemoud & Ustin, 2008; Kacira et al., 2005;
Knipling, 1970; Maracci, Schmuck, Hosgood, & Andreoli,
1991; Verdebout, Jacquemoud, & Schmuck, 1994; Vogelmann,
Bornman, & Josserand, 1989) have reported that the different
chemical and physical characteristics affect the leaf optical
properties (Fig. 1b).
When a plant is under water stress, which can be experi-
enced when the demand for water exceed the water supply in
the root zone or plants capability to transport the water from
root zone to the atmosphere, the photosynthesis rate is
decreased due to xanthophyll oxidation. As a result, stomata
close and lead to decreased CO2 assimilation rate. Therefore,
the light energy that is absorbed by the leaf, cannot be used to
guide photosynthetic electron transport and a part of the solar
radiation returns back to the atmosphere as reﬂectance radi-
ation, while the other part is dissipated as heat or re-emitted
as chlorophyll ﬂuorescence. As with water stress, nutrient
stress also inﬂuences the photosynthetic rate and conse-
quently the electromagnetic energy that is absorbed by the
b i o s y s t e m s e n g i n e e r i n g 1 5 1 ( 2 0 1 6 ) 3 7 4 e3 9 8
376
leaf due to the nutrient's involvement in the photosynthetic
process as a component of photosynthetic enzymes (such as
ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase) and chloro-
phylls. Meanwhile, the high leaf absorption percentage of
solar radiation in the visible range of the spectrum causes a
rapid saturation of the reﬂected signal for a very low amount
of canopy leaf area. This results in a reﬂectance light signal
reduction (Soudani et al., 2012). That is why several reﬂec-
tance indices, or regions in the spectrum that are based on
visible light spectrum, are strongly dependent on ambient
light.
The radiation with wavelength longer than 950 nm is
usually absorbed by the leaf liquid while the radiation at
~1000 nm is absorbed by the leaf dry matter (carbon and
nutrient compounds). The reﬂectance in the 680e750 nm
wavelengths is also inﬂuenced by water and nutrient con-
centration, while the reﬂectance spectrum in 750e800 nm is
varied mostly by leaf water content concentration.
Several researchers (Bandyopadhyay, Pradhan, Sahoo,
Singh, & Gupta, 2014; Jain, Ray, Singh, & Panigrahy, 2007;
Kim, Glenn, Park, Ngugi, & Lehman, 2010; Kruse, 2004, p. 69;
Penuelas, Gamon, Fredeen, Merino, & Field, 1994; Penuelas,
Filella, & Araus, 1997; Penuelas, Filella, Biel, Serrano, & Save,
1993; Ray, Das, Singh, & Panigrahy, 2006; Sclemmer, Francis,
Shanahan, & Scepers, 2005) showed that the reﬂectance in
the green and red bands under water or nutrient stress is
increased due to leaf Chlorophyll concentration reduction
(less absorbance radiation). Other studies (Amatya, Karkee,
Alva, Larbi, & Adhikari, 2012; Jones, Weckler, Maness, Stone,
& Jayasekara, 2004; Sclemmer et al., 2005; Vigneau, Ecarnotb,
Rabatela, & Roumet, 2011) reported that the reﬂectance of
stressed plants was increased in the near infrared region due
to radiation scattering by air content risen in sponge cavities
(less water content). Penuelas et al. (1993) observed a signiﬁ-
cant decrease in the magnitude of the whole NIR reﬂectance of
stressed plants only when the plant was close to wilting.
Apparently, other factors such as leaf thickness, leaf age, leaf
angle, leaf area index (LAI) and plant species can inﬂuence the
leaf spectral response in a greater degree than the water stress
during measurement (Fig. 2).
In contrast to NIR region, in the middle infrared region
(MIR), more absorption and less reﬂectance and transmittance
is observed in green leaves due to the fact that water absorbs
more radiation in that spectrum (Fig. 1b). Thus, this region
contains more information about sponge parenchyma that
includes water, cellulose, nitrogen, lignin and starch. The
Fig. 1 e (a). Inﬂuence of electromagnetic spectrum based on structure of a typical plant leaf. From Summy et al. (2003).
(b). Reﬂectance, absorbance and transmittance spectral of a plant leaf. From Jacquemoud and Ustin (2008).
Fig. 2 e Effect of leaf area index (left) and mean leaf angle (right) increase on canopy reﬂectance. From Asner (1998).
b i o s y s t e m s e n g i n e e r i n g 1 5 1 ( 2 0 1 6 ) 3 7 4 e3 9 8
377
basic absorption areas for leaf water status monitoring are
located around 1450 nm, 1940 nm and 2500 nm and the overall
shape of the MIR spectrum is largely inﬂuenced by water.
Nevertheless, Sun et al. (2008) indicated that although the
1450 nm wavelength is highly sensitive to fast and steep
developing stress, it cannot be used for low stress cases. In
addition, several authors (Bowman, Hubick, Von Caemmerer,
& Farquhar, 1989; Cordon & Lagorio, 2007; Hunt & Rock, 1989;
Jacquemoud & Ustin, 2008; Verdebout et al., 1994) have already
concluded that the use of MIR is insufﬁcient to estimate the
leaf water status due to the fact that reﬂectance changes
within a biologically meaningful range are too insigniﬁcant
and the light signal at that spectrum is too low (high light
signal noise). Thus, MIR has not been used extensively in plant
water stress assessment, as more satisfactory results have
been reported in the visible and NIR spectrum regions.
According to K€oksal, Gu¨ ng€or, and Yildirim (2010), based on
a ﬁrst derivative analysis, certain parts of the spectrum can be
selected for further study. Thus, in order to amplify the
spectral differences detected and to provide additional details
for stress detection, several authors have proposed combining
the data from spectral bands into indices. Therefore, more
than 150 vegetation indices (VI) have been presented during
the last three decades (Asner, 1998; Borzuchowski & Schulz,
2010; Silleos, Alexandridis, Gitas, & Perakis, 2006). However,
only a small subset of them have substantial biophysical basis
or have been systematically tested for water stress. In addi-
tion, more than 20 VIs have been based on the visible and NIR
spectrum. According to Aparicio, Villegas, Royo, Casadesus,
and Araus (2004) and Zakaluk and Sri Ranjan (2008), the
most common forms of reﬂectance indices are the following:
- reﬂectance ratios corresponding to the ratio of two spectral
bands, which are referred to as simple ratio (SR) vegetation
indices and
- normalised difference (ND) vegetation indices, which are
deﬁned as ratios of the difference in reﬂectance between
two spectral bands to the sum of the reﬂectance at the
same bands.
1.4.
Rationale for the current review paper
Up to now, the majority of reﬂectance indices have been
studied in open ﬁeld and in a lab scale and not in the green-
house conditions. The object of this paper is to provide a re-
view of the most commonly used reﬂectance indices and
spectrum areas that can be applied for early plan water and
nutrient stress detection in green house conditions. The efﬁ-
ciency of the spectral indices in detecting water and nutrients
stress is benchmarked with plant direct and indirect physio-
logical measurements, such as leaf water potential, chloro-
phyll
ﬂuorescence,
canopy
temperature,
stomatal
conductance, transpiration, substrate water content and
others.
In addition, objective of this manuscript is to brieﬂy
describe the most important technical speciﬁcations of
ground-based remote sensors that are used for reﬂectance
measurements. The most popular types of spectrometer
sensors, such as hyperspectral and multispectral remote
cameras are presented. Suggestions are made for speciﬁc
guidelines to avoid errors in measurements during data
acquisition.
2.
Reﬂectance measurement technologies
2.1.
Sensors
Several sensor systems are available and many ground-based
remote sensing (RS) technologies have been used to obtain the
required information (Lan, Zhang, Lacey, Hoffmann, & Wu,
2009). The progress of ground-based reﬂectance measure-
ment techniques plays a critical role in accurate monitoring
and assessment of plant reﬂectance. Different techniques for
acquiring plant reﬂectance data have been used to determine
qualitative and quantitative plant characteristics. Initially
measurements were conducted in laboratory studies and later
on, in satellite and airborne remote sensing. The development
of non-imaging ﬁeld spectroscopy gave the opportunity for a
real-time and cost effective way to undertake large scale
monitoring in open ﬁeld and greenhouse covered canopy.
Moreover, the improvement of non-imaging ﬁeld spectros-
copy to image remote sensing data acquisition lead to vast
amount of plant reﬂectance data generation at higher spatial
resolution (Liaghat & Balasundram, 2010). In this section, a
classiﬁcation of ground based (remotely or in contact) sensing
techniques are presented.
Ground based sensors can be classiﬁed into three distinct
categories: (a) spectrometers and radiometers (b) imaging and
non-imaging and (c) active and passive. The basic character-
istic of non-imaging (spot) ﬁeld spectroscopy is the ability of
the sensor to allow continuous sensing at a wide range of
spectral bands (spectrometers) or at a smaller range which is
limited to certain spectral bands (radiometers). The key
feature which distinguishes a spectrometer from a multiband
radiometer is the continuous measurement of the produced
spectrum (Milton, 1987). A non-imaging sensor system can
easily measure radiance reﬂectance by pointing the ﬁbre optic
input of the equipment at the point or at all points of the
target, taking measurements of highly accurate locations and
topographic proﬁles. The performance of these non-imaging
sensors depends on an integrated artiﬁcial light source in
order to collect the reﬂected radiation from the target and
thus, these sensors are called ‘active sensors’. Milton (1987)
ﬁrst reviewed the principles of ﬁeld spectroscopy parame-
ters. Since then, different ground-based remote sensing
techniques have been developed and used mostly in the open
ﬁeld.
Over the last decade, advances in sensors' technology have
developed optic systems that made possible the simultaneous
recording of several bands of different points of the target
with a single acquisition. Imaging systems allow light to
entering the sensor through the slit, impinge on the photo-
sensitive area of the detector and give exact spatial and
spectral resolution whereas each pixel receives light of
different areas of the spectrum (Huang & Zeng, 2001). Based on
different recording spectral bands (channels), the imaging
reﬂectance sensors can be distinguished into panchromatic
images (1 channel), colour images (3 channels), multispectral
b i o s y s t e m s e n g i n e e r i n g 1 5 1 ( 2 0 1 6 ) 3 7 4 e3 9 8
378
