Received: 14 June 2021
Accepted: 1 August 2021
Published online: 24 September 2021
DOI: 10.1002/agj2.20841
A R T I C L E
B i o m e t r y, M o d e l i n g , a n d S t a t i s t i c s
Potato crop stress identification in aerial images using deep
learning-based object detection
Sujata Butte1
Aleksandar Vakanski2
Kasia Duellman3
Haotian Wang1
Amin Mirkouei2
1 Dep. of Computer Science, Univ. of Idaho,
Idaho Falls, ID 83402, USA
2 Dep. of Nuclear Engineering and
Industrial Management, Univ. of Idaho,
Idaho Falls, ID 83402, USA
3 College of Agricultural and Life Sciences,
Univ. of Idaho, Idaho Falls, ID 83402, USA
Correspondence
Aleksandar Vakanski,Dep.of Nuclear Engi-
neering and Industrial Management,Univ.of
Idaho,Idaho Falls,ID83402,USA.
Email: vakanski@uidaho.edu
Assigned to AssociateEditor Kabindra
Adhikari.
Abstract
Recent research on the application of remote sensing and deep learning-based analy-
sis in precision agriculture demonstrated a potential for improved crop management
and reduced environmental impacts of agricultural production. Despite the promis-
ing results, the practical relevance of these technologies for field deployment requires
novel algorithms that are customized for analysis of agricultural images and robust
to implementation on natural field imagery. The paper presents an approach for ana-
lyzing aerial images of a potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) crop using deep neural net-
works. The main objective is to demonstrate automated spatial recognition of healthy
vs. stressed crop at a plant level. Specifically, we examine premature plant senes-
cence resulting in drought stress on ‘Russet Burbank’ potato plants. We propose a
novel deep learning (DL) model for detecting crop stress, named Retina-UNet-Ag.
The proposed architecture is a variant of Retina-UNet and includes connections from
low-level semantic representation maps to the feature pyramid network. The paper
also introduces a dataset of aerial field images acquired with a Parrot Sequoia cam-
era. The dataset includes manually annotated bounding boxes of healthy and stressed
plant regions. Experimental validation demonstrated the ability for distinguishing
healthy and stressed plants in field images, achieving an average dice score coeffi-
cient (DSC) of 0.74. A comparison to related state-of-the-art DL models for object
detection revealed that the presented approach is effective for this task. The proposed
method is conducive toward the assessment and recognition of potato crop stress in
aerial field images collected under natural conditions.
Abbreviations: CNN, convolutional neural network; DL, deep learning;
DSC, Dice score coefficient; FPN, Feature Pyramid Network; IoU,
Intersection over Union; NDVI, normalized difference vegetation index;
NIR, near-infrared; NNs, neural networks; PA, precision agriculture; RE,
red-edge; RGB, red–green–blue; UAV, unmanned aerial vehicle.
© 2021 The Authors. Agronomy Journal © 2021 American Society of Agronomy
1
INTRODUCTION
Precision agriculture (PA) is a concept for site-specific crop
management based on observation and measurement of crop
variability in a field (Pierce & Nowak, 1999; Stafford, 2000).
The aim in PA is to improve crop yield and reduce the environ-
mental impacts of agricultural production by decreased use
of agrochemical substances. Despite the confirmed economic
Agronomy Journal. 2021;113:3991–4002.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/agj2
3991
3992
BUTTE ET AL.
and environmental benefits of PA, professional reports and
scientific surveys point to low rates of technology adoption
(Pathak et al., 2019; Pierpaoli et al., 2013). Barriers towards
increased adoption include the development of advanced data
processing methods and platforms for automated seeding,
weeding, and harvesting (Castle et al., 2016; Nahry et al.,
2011). For instance, the use of cost-effective remote sens-
ing systems in PA, such as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),
equipped with multispectral or hyperspectral sensors, pro-
vides an appealing means for quick observation of large fields
(Maes et al., 2017; Martinelli et al., 2015; Pádua et al., 2017;
Walsh et al., 2018). Intervention based on gathered sensor data
and follow-up data analysis is beneficial toward reducing or
avoiding economic losses (Behmann et al., 2015; Berdugo
et al., 2014; Bravo et al., 2003). Similarly, the implemen-
tation of advanced machine learning algorithms for image
analysis offers new insights for crop management in PA and
contributes to extracting subtle patterns in acquired field
imagery (Barth et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2014; Nagaraju &
Chawla, 2020; Singh et al., 2018).
In the published literature, a large body of work employed
image analysis via conventional machine learning approaches
for crop health assessment (Barbedo, 2013; Hamuda et al.,
2016). These approaches often involve an initial step of
image segmentation into plant and soil pixels, typically from
extracted color-index information, such as normalized differ-
ence vegetation index (NDVI), excess green index (ExG), and
excess green minus excess red index (ExGR) (Bégué et al.,
2018; Candiago et al., 2015; Kyratzis et al., 2017; Xue & Su,
2017). Frequently applied image analysis methods encompass
support vector machines (Camargo & Smith, 2009; Rumpf
et al., 2010), k-nearest neighbors, random forests (Lottes et al.,
2017), and multivariate Gaussian classifiers (Hamuda et al.,
2016). However, conventional machine learning approaches
rely on manually fine-tuning a set of parameters for a given
collection of images, which may lead to decreased perfor-
mance on images taken under different environmental con-
ditions (e.g., illumination, weather), growing stages, or soil
types (Abade et al., 2020; Milioto et al., 2017).
A recent line of research emphasized the advantages of
deep learning (DL)-based methods for image analysis in
PA (Abade et al., 2020; Ghosal et al., 2018; Nagaraju &
Chawla, 2020; Ramcharan et al., 2017; Taghavi Namin et al.,
2018; Yamamoto et al., 2017). Contrary to the conventional
methods that typically employ steps of segmentation, fea-
ture extraction, and classification, DL models comprise multi-
layer architectures that integrate all processing steps into one
single framework for automated feature extraction and map-
ping the inputs to an output function (Goodfellow et al., 2016;
LeCun et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2018). The capacity to learn
rich hierarchical features at multiple levels of abstraction by
DL models has been conducive to improved performance and
generalization abilities, in comparison to vegetation indices
Core Ideas
∙New deep learning method for identification of
drought stress in potato plants.
∙Implemented on images collected under natural
field conditions by a low-flying unmanned aerial
vehicle.
∙The approach modifies the feature pyramid net-
work used in object detection models.
∙Connections to low-level semantical information
from the encoding path introduced.
∙The generated dataset of potato field images has
been posted for open public access.
and manually crafted features (Kamilaris & Prenafeta-Boldú,
2018). Several early studies for DL-based crop health assess-
ment used convolutional neural networks (CNN) models
for classification of healthy and diseased leaves of bananas
(Musa X paradisiaca L.) (Amara et al., 2017), apples (Malus
sylvestris Mill.) (Liu et al., 2018), cassava (Manihot escu-
lenta Crantz) (Ramcharan et al., 2017), tomato (Lycopersi-
con esculentum Mill.) (Yamamoto et al., 2017), and soy-
bean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.] (Ghosal et al., 2018). Sim-
ilarly, Mohanty et al. (2016) applied a CNN for classifica-
tion of 14 crop species and 26 diseases using a dataset of
healthy and diseased plant leaves images (Hughes & Salathe,
2015).
Although DL-based classification models have proven ben-
eficial for analysis of close-up images of leaves or crop
(e.g., taken using a cellphone camera) (Mohanty et al., 2016;
Sladojevic et al., 2016), recent studies shifted the emphasis
toward more advanced image analysis tasks, such as image
segmentation and object detection. The major advantages and
practical relevance of such tasks in comparison to image clas-
sification originate from the capability to identify and local-
ize objects (e.g., stressed areas) in agricultural field images.
Image segmentation is the process of partitioning an image
into multiple segments, by delineating the edges of the objects
of interest and separating them from the background. In the
context of PA, DL-based approaches were implemented for
segmentation of crop and weed (Champ et al., 2020; Dyr-
mann et al., 2016; Gao et al., 2020; Mortensen et al., 2016;
Sa et al., 2017), fruits (Zhang et al., 2020), and seeds (Toda
et al., 2020). Object detection is a related image analysis task,
where the goal is to determine whether particular objects
of interest (e.g., diseased or otherwise stressed plants) are
present in an image, identify the locations of all present
objects of interest in the image, and determine the category
(i.e., healthy vs. stressed, or specific stress type) for all found
objects. In previous PA studies, a body of work employed
DL for object detection with application to fruit counting
 14350645, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://acsess.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/agj2.20841 by Indian Institute Of Technology, Kharagpur Central Library, Wiley Online Library on [16/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
BUTTE ET AL.
3993
(Apolo-Apolo et al., 2020; Bargoti & Underwood, 2017; Rah-
nemoonfar et al., 2017; Sa et al., 2016) and fruit load estima-
tion (Koirala et al., 2019; Villacrés & Auat Cheein, 2020),
disease detection (Fuentes et al., 2017; Rançon et al., 2019),
and crop damage assessment (HamidiSepehr et al., 2019).
The choice of applied algorithms for image segmentation vs.
object detection in agriculture has been primarily task driven.
Still, preparing ground truth labels for image segmentation
requires demarcating all objects in images, which is substan-
tially more time-consuming in comparison to defining the
location of a set of bounding boxes in object detection. Sub-
sequently, object detection methods have been the preferred
choice in many related tasks (Abade et al., 2020; HamidiS-
epehr et al., 2019) where the approximate locations of the
bounding boxes for the objects of interest provide a satisfac-
tory level of accuracy.
Despite the impressive progress in recent years and the
surging number of related papers and applications, there are
still numerous challenges for the actual deployment of DL
methods in the field. Specifically, the major obstacles involve:
(a) difficulty in processing natural crop images, characterized
with large crop variability across regions and growing stages,
changing environmental conditions, overlapping and moving
crop/plants/leaves, and cluttered background; (b) scarcity of
crop datasets with corresponding labels and annotations; and
(c) advanced and robust algorithms designed and optimized
for processing specific crop images.
In this work, we attempt to partially address all of the above
challenges. Specifically, we introduce a novel DL architec-
ture for drought stress assessment of potato (Solanum tubero-
sum L.) crop in natural aerial images, as well as we introduce
a dataset of agricultural images. A Parrot Sequoia camera
mounted on a Solo UAV flying at a low altitude of 3 m above
the ground was used for acquiring images of a potato field.
We manually annotated the regions of healthy and stressed
potato plants with rectangular bounding boxes, and posted the
dataset on a dedicated website for open public access. The pro-
posed DL architecture is a variant of the Retina-UNet (Jaeger
et al., 2018) model for object detection, which employs a Fea-
ture Pyramid Network (FPN) for generating high-level fea-
ture representations for object prediction at multiple levels of
abstraction. We refer to the proposed model as Retina-UNet-
Ag, due to the application in agriculture. The connections
between the layers in Retina-UNet-Ag are designed for detect-
ing regions with moderate size. The experimental validation
indicates ability for spatial recognition of crop stress in aerial
field imagery. We conducted a performance comparison to
four state-of-the-art architectures for object detection, includ-
ing: Mask Region-based Convolutional NN (Mask R-CNN)
(He et al., 2017), RetinaNet (Lin et al., 2020), Faster Region-
based Convolutional NN (Faster R-CNN) (Ren et al., 2015),
and You Only Look Once (YOLO) v3 (Redmon & Farhadi,
2017). In the comparative analysis, our proposed network pro-
duced more accurate predictions in comparison to these object
detection models for the considered task.
In the published literature, a number of other studies
reported research on DL-based identification of biotic crop
stresses, such as water stress (An et al., 2019; King & Shellie,
2016; Ramos-Giraldo et al., 2020) and cold damage (Yang
et al., 2019), as well as abiotic crop stress, such as nutrient
deficiencies (Anami et al., 2020; Tran et al., 2019; Watcha-
reeruetai et al., 2018). Several studies have also addressed the
problem of DL-based crop stress localization in aerial images
of natural fields taken under real conditions (Chiu et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2019). The significance of our approach is in the
design of a DL-based object detection model for potato crop
stress identification in natural aerial images. Prior related DL
research for potato crop assessment either focused on clas-
sification tasks using basic CNN architectures (Polder et al.,
2019), tuber disease identification (Oppenheim et al., 2019),
or single-leaf image classification (Pardede et al., 2018). The
most similar work to ours was reported by Huang et al. (2020),
which employs RetinaNet for detection of rice (Oryza sativa
L.) plants in a paddy field. However, the authors collected
field images with a tractor-carried camera. Also, the com-
parison provided in the Results section in this paper indicates
that our proposed Retina-UNet-Ag model outperformed Reti-
naNet (and the four other DL-models for object detection) on
the potato stress detection task.
The main contributions of this paper are: (a) a novel DL
model for detection of drought-stressed potato crop in natural
aerial images at a plant level and (b) an open dataset of 360
UAV images (and an augmented training dataset of 15,000
images) of potato crop with labeled regions of healthy and
stressed/diseased plants.
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1
Field and induction of stress
The potato field used in this study was established at the Uni-
versity of Idaho - Aberdeen Research and Extension Center
(Bingham County, Idaho). The geographical coordinates of
latitude and longitude for the Aberdeen Research Center are
42.953 ˚N and 112.827 ˚W, respectively. The overall area of
the used potato field is 1.74 ha (4.3 acres) and was planted to
potato cultivar Russet Burbank on 14 May 2018; potato plants
were vine-killed on 10 September and harvested on 5 Octo-
ber. Plots were overhead irrigated with 1/8-in (3.175 mm) noz-
zle sprinklers spaced approximately 12.2 m (40 ft.) apart, fer-
tilized, and otherwise maintained according to recommended
timing and amounts for southeastern Idaho. However, plants
along the first five rows along the western edge of the field
experienced up to a 50% reduction in water inputs compared
to the rest of the field, due to lack of additional irrigation
 14350645, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://acsess.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/agj2.20841 by Indian Institute Of Technology, Kharagpur Central Library, Wiley Online Library on [16/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3994
BUTTE ET AL.
F I G U R E 1
A Solo unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) and a
Sequoia camera used for collecting aerial images of the field
sprinklers along the western field edge. The field was assessed
for diseases and nutrient levels to ensure the stress observed
was due to drought rather than other stress factors. Plants were
assessed on 13 Aug. 2018, when stressed plants due to insuf-
ficient water inputs were beginning to senesce prematurely.
2.2
Aerial images collection
For collecting aerial images of the field, we employed a small
UAV Solo by 3DR, shown in Figure
1. Mounted to the
drone is a multispectral camera Sequoia by Parrot (“Parrot
SEQUOIA+,”, 2017). The Sequoia camera weighs 72 g, and
it is specifically designed for use with small UAVs. It has
four monochrome sensors with 1.2 MPx resolution (960 ×
1,280 pixels) that acquire images at four wavelength bands
of the electromagnetic spectrum: visible green (550 nanome-
ters), visible red (660 nanometers), red-edge (735 nanome-
ters), and near-infrared (790 nanometers). The sensors cap-
ture and log the reflectance within an interval of 40 nanome-
ters around the above-listed wavelengths. The device also has
an integrated red–green–blue (RGB) camera with 16 MPx
resolution (3,456 × 4,608 pixels). Sequoia includes a down-
welling irradiance sensor (also referred to as sunshine sensor)
that is shown attached to the top of the drone in Figure 1. The
sensor measures the level of irradiance for each of the four
wavelength bands. The measurements are used for radiometric
correction of reflectance images taken under different illumi-
nation conditions. The camera has an integrated inertial mea-
surement unit (IMU) and a magnetometer, as well as a global
positioning system (GPS) unit, IMU, and magnetometer built
into the irradiance sensor.
The images were acquired by flying the drone at an altitude
of 3 m (9.8 ft.) above the ground at a slow speed of .5 m/s.
This altitude allows capturing high-resolution images of crop
plants, and subsequently, recognition of crop stress in the field
at a plant level. The ground resolution of the images is .08 cm
for the RGB sensor, and 0.28 cm for the monochrome sensors.
The footprint per image is 3.6 × 2.7 m for the RGB sensor, and
3.8 × 2.8 m for the monochrome sensors. A time-lapse mode
was used for capturing the images with a time interval set to
1.21 s.
2.3
Dataset
The dataset consists of labeled images containing a mix of
healthy and stressed potato plants. The RGB sensor in Sequoia
captured high-resolution images with 3,456 × 4,608 pixels
size. Examples of the images are shown in Figure 2. From
the collected set of high-resolution full-size RGB images, we
extracted smaller image patches with 1,500 × 1,500 pixels size
from different spatial locations by cropping and applying rota-
tions of 45, 90, and 135 degrees. This step resulted in a set of
360 image patches, each containing several rows of healthy
and stressed potato plants. The full-size images acquired with
the four narrow-band multispectral sensors of Sequoia have
a resolution of 960 × 1,280 pixels. The images taken by the
monochrome sensors were first undistorted and aligned in a
pre-processing step, to account for the different locations of
the sensors on the device. Next, image patches with a size of
416 × 416 pixels were extracted for each of the four spec-
tral bands.
Besides applying translation and rotation for the extraction
of image patches, we explored additional techniques to fur-
ther increase the size of the training dataset, generally referred
to as data augmentation. To this end, we applied the follow-
ing four common methods for data augmentation: rescaling
the pixels’ intensity in original images (minimum percentile
value = .2, and maximum percentile value = 99.8), adjust-
ing the gamma value of image brightness (gamma value = .8,
and gain value = .8), adjusting the sigmoid value of image
contrast (cutoff value = .5, gain value = 10), and applying
a small amount of random noise (Gaussian distribution with
mean = 0 and standard distribution = .1). Data augmentation
was applied to 300 images, resulting in an augmented training
set of 1,500 images. The remaining 60 images were used for
testing. Data augmentation was not applied to the test images,
as well as the image patches in the test set were independent
from the training set (i.e., they were extracted from differ-
ent images).
Training object detection models requires labels with
regions demarcating the objects of interest in images. For
the potato crop dataset, the objects of interest are areas with
healthy and stressed plants in images. Healthy and stressed
plants were differentiated visually by color, with stressed
plants exhibiting a yellower color compared to the healthy
green plants. We used the open-source graphical annotation
software LabelImg (Tzutalin, 2019) to manually annotate the
 14350645, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://acsess.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/agj2.20841 by Indian Institute Of Technology, Kharagpur Central Library, Wiley Online Library on [16/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
BUTTE ET AL.
3995
F I G U R E 2
High-resolution field images with healthy and stressed plants. The stressed plants are located in the upper-half segment in the left
image, and right-half segment in the right image
F I G U R E 3
Retina-UNet-Ag architecture. C2–C5 blocks output feature maps from stages 2–5 of the base model ResNet-50. P2–P6 are the
decoding block layers of the feature pyramid network, whose outputs are used for classification and bounding box regression
regions containing healthy and unhealthy crop with rectangu-
lar bounding boxes. The output coordinates of the bounding
boxes and the class labels were saved as XML files, and were
used for generating the ground truth for model training.
The dataset is posted for open public access on the fol-
lowing website https://www.webpages.uidaho.edu/vakanski/
Multispectral_Images_Dataset.html
2.4
Deep learning method for object
detection
The proposed Retina-UNet-Ag model is a variant of the
Retina-UNet architecture, which was initially proposed for
object detection in medical images (Jaeger et al., 2018),
and it integrates features that are characteristical for U-Net
(Ronneberger et al., 2015) into the RetinaNet (Lin et al., 2020)
model for object objection.
U-Net is a frequently used network for image segmentation.
It employs an encoder–a contracting sequence of hidden lay-
ers (e.g., blue blocks in Figure 3) for learning semantic feature
representations that gradually reduce the resolution of the
feature maps, and a decoder–an expanding sequence of hid-
den layers (e.g., orange blocks in Figure 3) for reconstructing
the feature maps to the initial size of images. A distinguish-
ing design aspect of U-Net is the skip connections (e.g., the
arrows between the blue and orange blocks in Figure 3) which
enable transferring spatial information between the hidden
layers in the expanding and contracting paths of the model.
RetinaNet is a well-known network for object detection,
where the output consists of a set of rectangular bounding
boxes for the detected objects in the images (rather than
an accurate delineation of object edges, as in segmentation
tasks). RetinaNet belongs to the group of one-stage object
detectors, and employs a convolutional FPN (Lin et al., 2017)
for generating high-level feature representations that are suit-
able for detecting objects at multiple levels of abstraction.
While object prediction based on high-level representations
is advantageous in terms of positional invariance of objects
(i.e., an object can be successfully detected regardless of
being at different positions across the set of images), it results
in loss of important low-level semantic information, which
 14350645, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://acsess.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/agj2.20841 by Indian Institute Of Technology, Kharagpur Central Library, Wiley Online Library on [16/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
