IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. GE-24, NO.
1, JANUARY 1986
Detection and Evaluation of Plant Stresses for Crop
Management Decisions
RAY D. JACKSON, PAUL J. PINTER, JR., ROBERT
J. REGINATO, AND SHERWOOD B. IDSO
Abstract-The ability to quantitatively assess crop conditions using
remotely sensed data would not only improve yield forecasts but would
also provide information that would be useful to farm managers in
making day-to-day management decisions. Experiments were con-
ducted using ground-based radiometers to relate spectral response to
crop canopy characteristics. It was found that radiometrically mea-
sured crop temperature, when compared with a reference tempera-
ture, was related to the degree of plant stress and could indicate the
onset of stress. Reflectance based vegetation indices, on the other hand,
were not sensitive to the onset of stress but were useful in evaluating
the consequences of stress as expressed in changing quantities of green
phytomass. Anatomical and physiological changes occur within plant
cells when plants are stressed and increase the amount of reflected ra-
diation. However, canopy geometrical changes may alter the amount of
radiation that reaches a radiometer, complicating the interpretation of
spectral response to stress. Timeliness, frequency of coverage, and res-
olution are three factors that must be considered when satellite-based
sensors are used to evaluate crop conditions for farm management ap-
plications.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE POTENTIAL yield of any crop can be realized
.
only when water, nutrient, and environmental condi-
tions are optimum, and if disease and insect problems are
minimized or prevented. Whenever plant growth is re-
tarded by less than optimum conditions, the plants are said
to be stressed. The word "stress", although difficult to
define from a physiological point of view, is commonly
used to signify any effect on plant growth that is detri-
mental. The term "crop condition" implies an evaluation
of the degree of stress. Visual assessment of crop stress
is qualitative at best, with the terms "good" or "poor"
frequently used to describe crop condition.
The quantification of plant stress using remotely sensed
data was a major objective of several research projects
conducted under the AgRISTARS program. Although the
research goal was to quantify crop stress using satellite
data, it was necessary to conduct a number of experiments
using ground-based radiometers. These instruments were
used over controlled plots with known stress conditions
and with known plant and soil parameters to obtain the
data base required to relate the remotely sensed measure-
ment to a degree of crop stress.
During the course of the experiments it became appar-
Manuscript received May 25, 1985; revised August 10, 1985.
The authors are with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service,
U.S. Water Conservation Laboratory, Phoenix, AZ
85040.
IEEE Log Number 8406220.
ent that a number of factors can complicate the assessment
of stress when interpreting remotely sensed data. Ob-
viously, some frame of reference is required if a numerical
value is to be assigned to a stress condition. Furthermore,
the spectral response of plant canopies is related to geo-
metrical as well as physiological factors. In some cases,
differences in spectral response of two plant canopies may
be due to leaf orientation, not to different stress condi-
tions. When plants are stressed leaves may droop and curl,
causing geometrical as well as physiological changes that
affect the radiation received by a remote sensor.
The results obtained using ground-based instruments
should prove useful for improving stress assessment tech-
niques using satellite data. A quantitative measure of stress
from space platforms would not only improve our ability
to forecast yields, but would also provide information
which would aid farm managers in making day-to-day
management decisions.
This report discusses some research results concerning
the detection and quantification of plant stresses by re-
mote means, examines some complicating factors in the
interpretation of data, and assesses progress made in
adapting remote sensing technology to provide day-by-day
information on soil and crop conditions for use by farm
operators in making farm management decisions.
II. DETECTION AND QUANTIFICATION OF PLANT STRESS
Thermal-IR techniques can be used to detect and, in
some cases, quantify plant stress. Although plant temper-
atures can indicate the occurrence of stress, they cannot
identify its cause. If transpiration is restricted because of
a deficit of water (water stress) [1], or by the reduction of
the number of conducting vessels by disease or insects (bi-
ological stress) [2], or by high salinity in the soil water
(salinity stress) [3], the net result is an increase in plant
temperature.
When plants are stressed, physiological changes that
take place within leaves may alter their light absorption
and transmittance properties. This, along with plant ge-
ometry changes such as wilting and leaf curl, can affect
the amount of reflected and emitted radiation that reaches
a remote sensor. Often, by the time stress can be ascer-
tained by measurements of reflected solar radiation, visual
signs are evident, and yield reducing damage has already
occurred. Thus, plant temperatures indicate the onset and
degree of stress at a particular time, whereas reflected so-
lar measurements integrate the effects of stress over time.
U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright
99
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 16:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. GE-24, NO.
1, JANUARY
1986
A.
Water Stress
The potential of using infrared thermometers to mea-
sure canopy temperatures was demonstrated over two de-
cades ago [1], [4]. Since then, four indices, based on in-
frared temperature measurements, have been proposed for
the quantification of plant water stress. They are: stress-
degree-day (SDD) [5], [6], which is the canopy-air tem-
perature difference measured post-noon near the time of
maximum heating;
the canopy temperature variability
(CTV) [7], [8], which is the variability of temperatures
encountered in a field during a particular measurement pe-
riod; the temperature-stress-day (TSD) [9], which is the
difference in canopy temperature between a stressed crop
and a nonstressed reference crop; and the crop water stress
index (CWSI) [10], [11], which includes the vapor pres-
sure deficit of the air in relating the canopy and air tem-
perature difference to water stress. Although these indices
were developed to quantify water stress, they are useful
for evaluating any type of stress that causes a rise of plant
temperature.
In the development of the stress-degree-day, it was as-
sumed that effects of environmental factors (such as vapor
pressure, net radiation, and wind) would be largely man-
ifested in the canopy temperature, and that the difference
between the canopy temperature (T7.) and the air temper-
ature (Ta) would be a relatively useful indicator of plant
water stress. It was later demonstrated that the SDD was
insufficient to assess water stress in corn [7]. Gardner et
al.
[7] showed that stressed corn plants were below air
temperature much of the time, and suggested that corn
may be more sensitive to water stress than wheat. They
also suggested that canopy-air temperature differences
may be soil, crop, and climate specific.
The basis for the canopy temperature variability (CTV)
index is that soils are inherently nonhomogeneous, caus-
ing some areas within a field to become stressed before
others. Consequently, canopy temperatures would show a
greater variability as water becomes limiting than they
would under well watered conditions. This variability can
be used to signal the onset of water deficits [7], [12].
Gardner et al. [7] found standard deviations of 0.3°C in
fully irrigated plots of corn. In nonirrigated plots, the
standard deviation was as great as 4.2°C. They concluded
that plots which exhibited a standard deviation above 0.3°C
were in need of irrigation.
The difference in temperature between a stressed plot
and a well watered plot (called the temperature stress day
(TSD) by Gardner et al. [8]) can also be used as a water
stress indicator. Clawson and Blad [9] tested this concept
as to its usefulness for scheduling irrigations. Their corn
plots were irrigated when the average of all canopy tem-
peratures measured in the stressed plot during a particular
time period were 1°C warmer than the average canopy
temperatures of the well watered plot. These experiments
indicated that both methods, the CTV and the TSD, could
be used to evaluate water stress.
The crop water stress index (CWSI) is based on the fact
z
500
-0
U-i
-20
0
2
3
4
6
VAPOR PRESSURE DEFI C IT
CKPA)
Fig.
1. Theoretical relationship, between the canopy-air temperature dif-
ference and air vapor pressure deficit. Numbers at the end of the lines
indicate the value of the canopy resistance (r,.) used for the calculations.
that the canopy-air temperature difference is linearly re-
lated to the air vapor pressure deficit (VPD). This rela-
tion, derived from energy balance considerations, can be'
expressed as [41, [ 11 ]
Tc. - TA = raRn.
o (1+r/a
c
A
~~~pCp
A+
y(I + rc/ra)
VPD
A +
y(I ± re/ra)
(1)
where ra and r, are the aerodynamic and canopy resis-
tances (s
* m-1), R, is the net radiation (W
m 2)
p
the volumetric heat capacity of air (J
* m-3
* C-1), -y is
the psychrometric constant (Pa
* C-1), and A is the slope
of the temperature-saturated vapor pressure relation (Pa
C-1).
For well-watered plants the canopy resistance (rc) is low
but usually not zero [13]. Assuming that 5 s
- m- 1is rep-
resentative of rc at potential evapotranspiration, T, - Ta
was calculated as a function of VPD. Results of these cal-
culations are given in Fig.
1. Also shown are lines for rc
= 50, 500, and oo, which correspond to moderate, severe,
and infinite stress, respectively. When rc = oo, (1) reduces
to
c- TA
= raR,
pcp
(2)
which shows that the upper limit of plant temperature is
dependent on the aerodynamic resistance and the net ra-
diation.
The point B in Fig. 1 represents a measured value of T,
- Ta. The points A and C represent the values of Tc - Ta
that would occur if the plants were under maximum and
minimum stress, at a particular value of VPD. A crop
water stress index (CWSI) was defined as the ratio of the
distances BC/AC [10], [11]. The mathematical equivalent
100
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 16:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
JACKSON et al.: DETECTION AND EVALUATION OF PLANT STRESS
LJuz
L,J
hJ
L'i
U-
UI-
_
CLa:
LI
0zG
2
3
4
VAPOR PRESSURE DEFICIT
CKPA)
Fig. 2. Canopy-air temperature difference versus air vapor pressure deficit
for well-watered plots of alfalfa assumed to be transpiring at the potential
rate, and one severely water-stressed plot for which all temperature dif-
ferences were positive.
y= 1 + r/r0) -y
A + -y(l + rc/ra)
can also be written [11]. The term y*
=
yy(I + rcp/ra)
where rcp is the canopy resistance at potential evapotran-
spiration. Equation (3) and the graphical calculation shown
in Fig.
1 have been used by a number of authors to eval-
uate plant water stress in the field [3], [14]-[16]. Idso et
al. [17] obtained data for alfalfa at a number of locations
in the western U.S. (Fig. 2) to demonstrate the basic va-
lidity of the concept.
B. Biological, Salinity, and Nutrient Stress
Insects and disease organisms can affect the tempera-
ture of plants by disrupting the transpiration stream. Dis-
rupting transpiration vessels has the effect of increasing
the canopy resistance, and thus increasing the canopy-air
temperature difference (Fig.
1). Pinter et al. [2] used a
thermal-IR radiometer to measure leaf temperatures of
sugar beets infected with Pythium aphanidermatum. Leaf
temperatures
of
diseased
plants
averaged
2.6-3.6°C
warmer than leaf temperatures of healthy plants, yet the
disease could not be ascertained visually without exam-
ining the roots. Temperatures of diseased plants remained
higher than healthy plants even under conditions of water
stress. Results with cotton infected with Phymatotrichum
omnivorum were similar. Sunlit leaves of moderately dis-
eased plants averaged 3.3-5.3 °C hotter that those on plants
with no sign of fungal infection. The temperature differ-
ence between diseased and healthy plants was evident
1
day after an irrigation. As soil moisture was depleted, the
diseased plants invariably wilted first.
In arid areas, increased soil salinity is a frequent con-
sequence of irrigation. Early detection of saline areas may
permit preventative measures before the crop is signifi-
cantly damaged. Myers et al.
[18] using ground based
30
0
'a:
C
C!
LJ
l-z
LLi
<r:
z
lAJz
25S
20
F
is5
10
F
sF
0
-30
60
90
120
150
DAY OF YEAR
Fig. 3. The near-IR/red ratio as a function of time for a dry (circles) and a
wet (x) wheat plot.
canopy temperature measurements, determined that the
canopy-air temperature difference increased about 11C
with an increase of salinity corresponding to 16 dS
- m- 1.
Recently, Howell et al.
[3] found that canopy tempera-
tures were as sensitive to osmotic stress as were tradi-
tional measures, but that temperatures provided a better
spatial resolution.
Howell et al. [3] determined the VPD at which cotton
could maintain "unstressed" transpiration rates as related
to the soil electrical conductivity in the root zone. They
showed that cotton could maintain "unstressed" transpi-
ration only if the VPD was less than 3.5 kPa. For vapor
pressure deficits greater than 3.5 kPa, the plants showed
symptoms of stress although soil water was not limiting.
Laboratory studies of nutrient stress showed that min-
eral deficiencies increased the reflectance of radiation in
the visible wavelengths, whereas effects on near and mid-
dle IR reflectance varied according to the specific mineral
deficiency [19]. Field measurements of corn canopies that
received four nitrogen treatment levels showed that visible
red reflectance increased and the near infrared reflectance
decreased with decreasing nitrogen [20]. The ratio of near-
IR to red radiance was related directly to the amount of
nitrogen applied. Similar results have been reported for
nitrogen deficient sugarcane [21].
C. Comparison of Thermal and Reflective Indices
A number of vegetation indices which are sensitive to
the amount of green phytomass in the canopy can be
formed from bands in the reflected portion of the solar
spectrum [22]. One widely used vegetation index is the
near-infrared red ratio. Fig. 3 shows this ratio as a func-
tion of time during the growing season for two plots of
spring wheat, one of which was kept well watered (wet)
the other given limited water (dry) [23]. Data for the dry
plot are indicated by circles and for the wet plot by x. Two
critical periods, the onset of stress and the maximum al-
lowable stress, can be inferred from the vegetation index
shown in Fig. 3. The well watered plot, irrigated on day
79, maintained a steady growth rate throughout the veg-
INF
101
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 16:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. GE-24, NO.
1, JANUARY 1986
i.ol.01
II.
0.8 .
0.6s
X
LLJ
La
z
U1)
U)
LJ
U)
0:-
LXJ
<Ca
CL
0
0r
0.2 .
O.I.
0.8
0.6
0.2
Q.0*
U
I
0.8
0.6
0.4
0
LO
(/)
0.2
D
cc
I.-
0.0
a
t.0
La
CDm
0. 8
<
x
LLJ
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
70
90
11o
130
150
DAY OF YEAR
Fig. 4. The crop water stress index (circles) and the fraction of extractable
water used (dots) as functions of time for (a) a dry and (b) a wet wheat
plot. The dashed vertical lines indicate the dates when irrigations were
given.
etative stage. Early in the season no differences were ob-
served between the two plots, but after day 80 the growth
rate of the dry plot began to decrease, as indicated by the
inflection point (INF) in Fig. 3. At that time the rate of
accumulation of green phytomass slowed due to lack of
water in the dry plot. We interpret this as the first previ-
sual indication of stress. Without a well watered plot for
comparison, however,
it would be difficult to detect the
onset-of stress from a time sequence of the near-IR/red
ratio. Note also that the IR/red ratio for the dry plot
reached a maximum on day 93 (arrow labeled MAX). At
this point the net accumulation of green phytomass, as seen
by the radiometer, was zero. Plant architectural changes
such as wilting may have exposed more soil to the radi-
ometer, causing a further decrease in the ratio. On day 93,
visual symptoms of stress were evident, and the rate of
growth was zero. After day 93, there was a net loss of
green material. We interpret this point as the maximum
allowable stress, because the subsequent growth rate is
negative. After irrigation on day 100 the green phytomass
again increased, attaining nearly the same value as the
maximum reached earlier.
Fig. 4 shows the CWSI and extractable water used
(EWU) [24] for the same two experimental plots. The
CWSI data points are shown as circles clustering around
a line drawn by eye. Smoothed values of the EWU (mea-
sured with a neutron scattering technique) are shown as
dots. Irrigations are indicated by the vertical dashed lines.
Both the CWSI and the EWU increased with time until an
irrigation was given. At that point the EWU dropped im-
mediately to a low value, then began to increase. The
CWSI decreased, but several days were required to reach
a minimum [25], after which the CWSI continuously in-
creased signifying a stress induced reduction in transpi-
ration [11].
To identify the values of CWSI and EWU which cor-
responded with a reduction in growth rate, we used the
dates when the inflection and maximum points (arrows
Fig. 3) were reached, and read the corresponding values
of CWSI and EWU from Fig. 4. Combining the two mea-
surements allowed the stress limits to be determined for
wheat. The results indicate that, for maximum vegetative
growth of wheat, the CWSI should not exceed 0.28. If the
CWSI exceeds 0.52, net green phytomass can be expected
to decrease. On the other hand, once the CWSI reached a
minimum after irrigation, it continuously increased with
time, indicating a continuous increase ih stress. These re-
sults further illustrate that temperature based indices are
sensitive to the onset of stress whereas the reflectance
based indices can evaluate the consequences of stress as
expressed in changing quantities of green phytomass.
D. Effect of Canopy Geometry on Stress Assessment
Reflectance of light from a plant canopy is a complex
phenomenon which depends not only on the reflectance
properties of individual leaves and stems, but also on the
ways in which they are oriented and distributed. Under
stress, it is likely that both of these factors will change.
Laboratory measurements of leaf spectra have shown that
reflectance values in the 0.4-2.5 gm region increased with
decreasing leaf water content [26]. Gausman [27] dem-
onstrated this effect using cotton leaves. He found that re-
flectance increased in all wavelengths as the leaves pro-
gressively dehydrated. These results can be attributed to
anatomical and physiological changes within the plant
cells. Crop stress also causes the geometry of the plant to
change (e.g., leaf droop and curl), thus exposing different
fractions of vegetation and soil (both sunlit and shaded)
to the radiometer. Obviously, these changes will also af-
fect a reflectance measurement.
The relative importance of stress induced changes in
canopy architecture was studied on a cotton crop by Jack-
son and Ezra [28]. They measured the spectral response
of a cotton canopy by repetitively traversing a radiometer
over three adjacent rows of cotton. The instrument was a
Barnes Multiband Modular Radiometer (MMR)l that has
seven bands in the reflective solar and one in the thermal
IR. They are: MMR1, 0.45-0.52; MMR2, 0.52-0.60;
MMR3, 0.63-0.69; MMR4, 0.76-0.90; MMR5, 1.15-1.30;
MMR6, 1.55-1.75; MMR7, 2.05-2.30; and MMR8, 10.5-
12.5 ,tm. MMR bands 1-4 and 7 correspond to the The-
'Trade names and company names are included for the benefit of the
reader and imply no preferential treatment or endorsement by the U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture.
(a)
(b)
.
'I
I
,
.,
o0
I.U,.
I
102
0
0
.o
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 16:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
JACKSON et al.: DETECTION AND EVALUATION OF PLANT STRESS
+ MMR 8
z
to
220
-300900
0930
1000
1030
1t00
TIME OF DAY
Fig. 5. Observed changes in cotton canopy reflectance and temperature as
a function of time after plants were stressed by severing the main stem
near the soil. Data are expressed as a percentage of energy reflected or
emitted at the same time from two adjacent rows of cotton that were not
stressed
matic Mapper bands 1-4 and 7, MMR6 to TM5, and
MMR8 to TM6.
After an initial sequence of measurements, the stems of
the center row of cotton were cut at a point just above the
soil. Care was taken to minimize disturbance of the can-
opy structure. The cut plants were supported by wooden
dowels that had been inserted in the soil and to which the
stems had been tied the previous day. The subsequent des-
iccation of plants within this row was followed by com-
paring its reflectance and emittance with a control row.
Visual signs of wilting were apparent almost immedi-
ately after cutting. The uppermost leaves began to curl
and droop first, exposing normal appearing leaves below.
Then wilting progressed slowly to the lower leaves. At the
end of the experiment even the lowermost leaves showed
signs of wilt. As a consequence of wilting, the geometry
of the canopy rapidly changed. Prior to cutting the leaves
were predominately horizontal. As wilting progressed the
leaves became more vertical. The laboratory analysis of
Gausman [27] had indicated that reflectance increased in
all wavelengths with increasing water stress due to phys-
iological changes of the leaves. Field results indicate that
the reflectance may increase at some wavelengths and de-
crease at others, depending on the geometry changes that
accompany stress. The data in Fig. 5 show that, for this
variety of cotton, geometry changes play a major role in
determining reflectance properties of canopies. The re-
flectance of six of the seven reflected solar bands de-
creased as the cotton leaves dehydrated and the leaf angles
changed from horizontal to vertical. Our explanation is
similar to that of Holben et al. [29] in that, due to leaf
droop, first surface reflections were scattered into the can-
opy with less radiance reaching the sensor held above the
canopy. For the six bands, geometric effects overshad-
owed the increased reflectance that occurred due to phys-
iological changes.
0.5
0.
CE
LL
LJ
z
Lli
LL
LI
0. 4
0o.3
0.2
0. iF
o
,
0.4
0.8
1.2
1. 6
2.0
2.4
WAUELENGTH
Fig. 6. Reflectance factor as a function of wavelength as measured over
water lily, guayule, and water.
Reflectance in the red (0.63-0.69 ,tm) showed a net in-
crease. The same geometrical factors were active, but the
physiological changes were apparently greater. Radiation
in this band (known as the chlorophyll absorption band) is
absorbed by green leaves and provides the energy to com-
bine carbon dioxide and water in the complex biochemical
process of photosynthesis. In a recent review, Krieg [30]
concluded that the first effect of a reduction in water avail-
ability would be a reduction in this biochemical process
which would subsequently trigger the closure of stomata
to reduce the exchange of carbon dioxide and water with
the atmosphere. Our hypothesis is that the sudden inter-
ruption of transpiration immediately affected the photo-
synthesis process causing some of the red radiation that
was previously absorbed to be reflected back to the envi-
ronment.
On a percentage basis, the visible bands reacted as rap-
idly to a suddenly induced stress as did the temperature
(Fig. 5). A water absorption band (2.05-2.35 ,um) de-
creased by 17 percent within 10 min of a suddenly induced
stress, whereas the red band (0.63-0.67 ,tm) increased by
about 12 percent within the same time period. The near-
IR (0.76-0.90 ttm) showed the least percent change. This
result is contrary to the results of Holben et al. [29] who
found that the near-IR was the most sensitive to stress. In
general, our results support the statement of Knipling [26]
that the visible reflectance region is as sensitive to stress
as is the near infrared region. However, in the visible re-
gion the reflectance values are sufficiently small that stress
caused changes may not be detectable in an operational
mode.
Although the reflectance factor for water in all TM
bands is low (Fig. 6), the mid-IR bands (1.55-1.75 Am and
2.05-2.35
.tm) are proportedly sensitive to liquid water in
plant tissues. On this basis, one could assume that these
bands would be useful in detecting water stress in plants.
Yet, even when liquid water is present in a scene, the ge-
ometry of the scene components can be the dominant fac-
tor and can cause confusion in interpreting the data. For
example, the bidirectional reflectance factor was mea-
sured over a water surface containing water lilies (Nuphar
luteum Sibth. & Sm.) and over a stand of the drought
o WATER LILY
* GURYULE
A WATER
103
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 16:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
