Explainability-Aware Adversarial Threats and
Mitigation in Federated Learning Based Anomaly
Detection for Cooperative Smart Farming
Lopamudra Praharaj∗, Maanak Gupta†, and Deepti Gupta‡
∗†Dept. of Computer Science, Tennessee Tech University, Cookeville, Tennessee 38505, USA
‡Dept. of Computer Information Systems, Texas A&M University - Central Texas, TX, USA
∗lpraharaj42@tntech.edu, †mgupta@tntech.edu, ‡d.gupta@tamuct.edu
Abstract—Cooperative Smart Farming (CSF) provides an ef-
fective solution to address the evolving needs of smart farming,
making precision agriculture more accessible to small-scale
farmers. These cooperatives are formal enterprises collectively
ﬁnanced, managed, and operated by member farms, working
together for shared beneﬁts. However, CSFs face increased
security risks, since a cyberattack on one farm can disrupt the
entire network, threatening data integrity and decision-making.
Federated Learning (FL) offers a robust solution that enables
distributed learning by maintaining a global model across the
cloud server and multiple client farms on each edge node, where
the global model is trained on the client’s model parameter
without accessing the client’s private data.
This paper demonstrates that FL-based network anomaly
detection systems in CSF are vulnerable to data poisoning
adversarial attacks. We present a novel poisoning attack strategy
in which an adversary identiﬁes and exploits the most essential
features of the dataset using Explainable AI techniques. Using
the Explainability-informed features, the adversary can perform
targeted data poisoning attacks using the Fast Gradient Sign
Method (FGSM) and Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) attacks
against the trained Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) classi-
ﬁer. Our experimental results indicate that the accuracy of the FL
model declines signiﬁcantly when adversaries poison data by ma-
nipulating essential features compared to random perturbations.
We also propose a defense mechanism leveraging DistilBERT,
a lightweight language model deployed on each local client to
mitigate this adversarial attack. Our defense approach effectively
ﬁlters out poisoned data using cosine similarity, restoring model
robustness and accuracy.
Index Terms—Cooperative Smart Farming, Network Anomaly
Detection System, Federated Learning, Explainability, Adversar-
ial Attacks, Data poisoning Attacks, DistilBERT, Fast Gradient
Sign Method
I. INTRODUCTION
In response to the increase in global population, farmers
have started to utilize advanced technologies like the Internet
of Things (IoT), Machine Learning (ML), cloud computing,
and autonomous systems to effectively manage the balance
between food supply and demand [1], [2]. Although more
farmers are eager to adopt data-driven technologies, the cost
and technical expertise required often present signiﬁcant ob-
stacles for small/medium-scale farmers. A recently proposed
approach by Praharaj et al. [3], [4] presented Cooperative
Smart Farming (CSF) which beneﬁts the small/medium-scale
member farms by providing facilities such as resource sharing,
ﬁnancial assistance, access to large machinery, efﬁcient labor
during peak ﬁeldwork periods, production transportation, price
negotiation, equipment repair and maintenance, and data shar-
ing, among others [5], [6]. However, as per the recent research,
and a report by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
cyberattacks on agricultural systems are no longer a distant
threat but a growing reality [7], [8]. In CSF, however, the risks
are more intense, as an attack on a single farm can compromise
all member farms due to their interconnected networks and
extensive data sharing [3], [4].
To mitigate this issue, farmers can deploy Network Anomaly
Detection Systems (ADS) in each smart farm within the CSF
network to detect and identify compromised farms. An ADS
passively monitors and analyzes device communications (i.e.
network trafﬁc) to detect suspicious activities and determine
if the network is under attack [3]. An ADS based solution has
the potential to detect unknown attacks at its local network
but fails to detect any unseen (i.e. zero-day) cyberattacks on
other farms within CSF [4]. In this context, Federated Learning
(FL) is an appropriate ﬁt, as it provides for the distributed
training of ML models that share the anomaly proﬁles with
the other member smart farms and take preventive measures
[4], [9]. In FL, each local smart farming client participating in
the system uses its private network dataset to train a local AD
model and send the model aggregates to a central aggregator.
The aggregator then uses a federated averaging algorithm to
aggregate the local models into a global model, which is then
distributed back to the member smart farm clients [4], [9].
Despite the efﬁciency of FL in network ADS, researchers
often overlook its vulnerability to adversarial attacks. FL in-
troduces security concerns as its clients are susceptible to even
minor changes in input data [10], [11]. A slight manipulation
or introduction of perturbations can lead to unintended outputs
in the global FL model [12]. For instance, an attacker could
perturb the training data of a malicious client to forcibly gain
access to a resource or poison the data by crafting adversarial
samples. This could compromise the global FL accuracy by
misclassifying malicious network attacks as benign or vice
versa [13].
Explainable AI (XAI) methods have been introduced to
enhance FL model transparency and security by focusing
on feature attribution, clarifying model decisions, and im-
2025 10th International Conference on Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC)
979-8-3315-4424-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
186
2025 10th International Conference on Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC) | 979-8-3315-4424-9/25/$31.00 USG | DOI: 10.1109/FMEC65595.2025.11119362
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 16:18:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
proving user trust. These explanations play a crucial role in
determining important features for network ADS, empowering
security analysts in countering threats [14], [15]. However,
explanations can also aid in generating more effective adver-
sarial samples for data poisoning attacks. By revealing crucial
features in model decision-making, an adversary can craft
samples that intentionally mislead the FL classiﬁer, causing
misclassiﬁcation and evade anomaly detection. Several meth-
ods [16] have been proposed to mitigate adversarial attacks,
including Krum, Multi-Krum, Trimmed Mean, Bulyan, and
Fed-Def. However, these strategies primarily address model
poisoning attacks, leaving data poisoning attacks at the client
level less explored [16].
This paper employs Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP)
to interpret model decisions and inform targeted misclassiﬁca-
tion attacks on the FL model. A CNN-based binary classiﬁer
is utilized, with DeepSHAP providing global insights into
model behavior. These explanations guide adversarial attacks
in binary classiﬁcation tasks, leverage the Fast Gradient Sign
Method (FGSM) and Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) for
adversarial analysis. Further, to make model robust against
these data poisoning attacks, we propose a comprehensive
defense strategy that effectively eliminates adversarially poi-
soned samples at the client level, ensuring robust FL training.
As part of our approach, we deploy a lightweight LLM
model, DistilBERT, at each FL client farm. Each client extracts
embeddings from its training samples using the deployed
model. Then, the cosine similarity between each sample and a
clean reference dataset is computed. The sample is ﬂagged
as poisoned and removed if the similarity falls below a
predeﬁned threshold, resulting in a denoised dataset. The FL
client subsequently trains on the denoised dataset, improving
model robustness. Evaluation results show that this approach
effectively mitigates data poisoning attacks, leading to a sig-
niﬁcant accuracy improvement in the FL model post-attack.
The main contributions of the papers are as follows:
1) We evaluate the effectiveness of an FL-based CNN model
for network anomaly detection using Smart Farming
datasets.
2) To enhance the analysis, we employ Shapley Additive Ex-
planations (SHAP) to interpret model predictions. These
SHAP explanations are then leveraged to inform targeted
data poisoning attacks, leading to misclassiﬁcation in the
Global FL model.
3) We evaluate adversarial attacks using two feature se-
lection strategies: the ﬁrst four features and randomly
selected four features. These evaluations are conducted
under two attack scenarios: a single-farm attack and a
multiple-farm attack, assessing their impact on the FL
model’s performance.
4) As part of our adversarial defense strategy, we deploy
a DistilBERT model at each FL client and ﬁlter out
poisoned data using cosine similarity-based masking.
5) Finally, we re-evaluate model performance on the de-
noised dataset and compute the FL accuracy, assessing
the model’s robustness against data poisoning attacks.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II discusses the relevant literature. Section III addresses the
proposed adversarial attack method. Section IV deﬁnes the
dataset and the attack setting. Section V explains the results of
the adversarial attack. Section VI provides the defense strategy
for mitigating the performed adversarial attack. The conclusion
and future works are presented in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Adversarial attack and Defense on Federated Learning
FL is a distributed ML approach that enhances the privacy
of training datasets while optimizing communication efﬁciency
during training rounds. Due to these advantages, FL has
been extensively adopted in network ADS to improve security
and threat detection without compromising sensitive data [4],
[9], [17], [18]. However, recent research indicates that FL
is vulnerable to poisoning attacks [13], [19], [20], where an
adversary compromises the global model by manipulating the
client’s training data or model updates, leading to degraded
model performance and biased decision-making. Biggio et
al. [21] introduced the ﬁrst poisoning attack method against
support vector machines (SVM). The authors used a gradient
ascent strategy to predict changes in the SVM’s decision
function, thereby degrading the target model’s accuracy. Sub-
sequently, Muñoz-González et al. [22] extended poisoning
attacks to deep learning models by leveraging the back-
gradient optimization method, enabling these attacks to target
a broader range of deep learning algorithms. Bagdasaryan et
al. [20] proposed the ﬁrst backdoor attack model against FL,
where one or more attackers embed backdoor functionality
into the FL using a generic constrain-and-scale technique.
Later, Fang et al. [23] explored the ﬁrst local model poisoning
attacks targeting Byzantine-robust FL methods. These attack
strategies primarily aim to alter the learning trajectory of the
model, causing deviations and ultimately shifting the decision
boundaries of the global model. In [13], the authors presented a
novel data poisoning attack that allows an adversary to implant
a backdoor into the aggregated detection model to incorrectly
classify malicious trafﬁc as benign.
As the diversity and complexity of adversarial attacks
against FL increase, several defense mechanisms are be-
ing developed to counteract them. These defense mecha-
nisms are broadly categorized into Data Sanitization, Data
Anomaly Detection, Adversarial training, model compression,
and Byzantine-resilient aggregation [10]. Adversarial training,
which involves augmenting the training dataset with adversar-
ial examples, is one of the most straightforward and widely
used defense strategies. By training the model on both clean
and adversarially perturbed inputs, it learns to identify and
resist such perturbations. However, the existing models may
not generalize well to new attacks not seen during training
[24]. Our work aims to build upon the fundamentals of
adversarial training, exploring new strategies to enhance the
robustness of FL-based network anomaly classiﬁers against
2025 10th International Conference on Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC)
187
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 16:18:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 1: Overview Of the Adversarial Attack on FL-based Network Anomaly Detection System
FGSM and PGD attacks, thereby contributing to developing
more secure and reliable FL systems.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Overview of the Attack
This work considers FL-based for cooperative smart farm-
ing on Network Anomaly Detection tasks (Fig. 1). The
setup consists of one server S, M local ADS clients K =
{k1, k2, . . . , kM}, and M private training datasets:
Dtrain = {Dtrain1, Dtrain2, . . . , DtrainM }
We assume that from the total client farms M in CSF, the
attacker can control N of them by injecting adversarial per-
turbations into the local training process ((Fig. 1)). The client
farms not controlled by the attacker are called benign clients,
and those controlled by the attacker are called malicious
clients. The attackers aim to reduce the accuracy of the global
FL model by whitebox attacks, which require knowledge of
the target model architecture. The objective is to misclassify
the benign packet in the training network dataset as malicious
and vice versa.
Due to the nature of FL, we assume that the attacker can
arbitrarily modify the malicious client’s local training process,
for example, modifying the training inputs or even updating
the local updates without affecting the benign clients’ local
update and server aggregation algorithm. The attacker also
knows the model information of the malicious client, the
features of the data set, and the server aggregation algorithm.
However, the attacker does not know about the updates on the
benign client (Fig. 1). The attacker’s strategy to perform a data
poisoning attack on the FL-based Network ADS is as follows:
1) The server S ﬁrst sends the global parameter to all the
clients.
2) The benign client downloads the global parameter, per-
forms the local training on private network data and sends
the model update to the server.
3) The malicious client downloads the global parameter,
performs the local training on the adversarial samples
and then sends the malicious update to the server S.
4) Server S performs the model aggregation and repeats
steps 1) to 3) until the model converges.
B. Attack Methods
For targeted data poisoning attacks, we choose the Fast
Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) and Projected Gradient De-
scent (PGD) attacks [25], both white box attacks requiring
the knowledge of the client’s model architecture. We aim to
generate adversarial samples that are misclassiﬁed as benign or
malicious to assess the robustness of the global FL-based ADS.
The FGSM method is a fast yet effective method that produces
adversarial samples with one-step calculation. Assuming input
x and its corresponding target t, FGSM calculates the gradient
of x with respect to the loss function. The adversarial example
2025 10th International Conference on Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC)
188
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 16:18:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
is generated using the following formula:
x = x + ϵ · sgn (∇xL(g(x; w), t))
(1)
where ϵ is a hyper-parameter that determines the adversarial
noise level, g(x; w) is the output of the neural network with
respect to the input x and parameter set w, and sgn(·) is the
sign function.
The sign function ensures that only the direction of the
gradient is used to construct the perturbation, scaled by ϵ to
control its magnitude:
ϵ · sgn (∇xL(g(x; w))) ∈[−1, 1].
(2)
In PGD, the attack starts with a uniform random initializa-
tion. The update formula for the PGD attack is given by:
ˆxt+1 = ΠPϵ(x)
 ˆxt + α · sgn
 ∇xL(g(ˆxt; w), t)

(3)
where, ˆxt is the perturbed data at the t-th iteration, Pϵ(x)
is the projected gradient descent function, sgn(·) is the sign
function, L(g(ˆxt; w), t) is the loss function with respect to
the perturbed input ˆxt and the neural network parameters
w, and α is the step size for each iteration. The projection
function Pϵ(x) ensures that the perturbations remain within a
small ϵ-neighborhood of the input x. This is achieved by ﬁrst
calculating the sign values of the gradient and then projecting
the results back to the allowable perturbation space. PGD is
considered one of the strongest adversarial attacks and is a
universal ﬁrst-order adversarial method.
To inform the attacks, we ﬁrst utilized SHAP (Shapley Ad-
ditive Explanations) [26] to identify the features most critical
to the local model’s decision-making process (Algorithm 1).
The SHAP values are a common way of getting consistent and
objective explanations of how each feature impacts the model’s
prediction. Unlike related works that focused on targeting
transparent models, our approach leverages post-hoc explana-
tions to pinpoint the most inﬂuential features in the network
trafﬁc dataset (Fig. 2). This targeted identiﬁcation reduces the
attack vector, making the data poisoning attacks more precise
and effective in FL-based Network ADS (Algorithm 1, (Fig.
2)).
Algorithm 1 (Algorithm 1, (Fig. 2)) illustrates the adversar-
ial attack strategy in an FL-based ADS for CSF. This approach
establishes an FL framework, enabling multiple clients to train
an anomaly detection model collaboratively without sharing
raw data. The attacker then identiﬁes the most critical features
for adversarial perturbation using SHAP values. Subsequently,
adversarial samples are generated using the FGSM and PGD
methods. Each malicious client evaluates the effectiveness
of these adversarial samples on its local anomaly detection
classiﬁer. Finally, the server aggregates and integrates the
adversarially perturbed data to assess its overall impact on
the global model.
Fig. 2: Overview of the Proposed Data Poisoning Attack
Algorithm 1: Explainability Guided Adversarial At-
tack in FL based ADS
Data: A network anomaly detection classiﬁer, network
data Dk of all the malicious clients, size of
perturbation, number of features to perturb,
SHAP values
Result: Accuracy of the trained global model
1. Initialize Federated Learning Environment for
Network Anomaly Detection;
2. Conﬁgure attack parameters for targeted
misclassiﬁcation in the FL context;
for each malicious client do
3. Identify the most important features using
SHAP values;
4. Use FGSM and PGD to generate adversarial
examples by perturbing the identiﬁed important
features;
5. Evaluate the local model on the adversarial
examples to measure the accuracy locally;
for Server-Side Aggregation do
6. Aggregate adversarial example results from
clients to simulate their impact on the global
model;
7. Evaluate the global FL classiﬁer on the
generated adversarial examples;
8. Calculate the accuracy for FGSM and PGD
attacks on FL;
IV. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
A. Dataset and Model Architecture
In this research, we used two raw datasets from our past
research [3], [4], which were classiﬁed into two different
smart farms, Smart Farm 1 and Smart Farm 2 datasets. We
preprocess this data set by removing any missing or malformed
values. Standardization was applied to all captured features
by calculating their standard deviations to ensure consistency
across the data. Additionally, we removed certain unnecessary
features for the network anomaly detection system. Features
like ‘Frame number’, ‘Source IP’, ‘Destination IP’, ‘Times-
tamp’, ‘Source port’, and ‘Destination port’ were excluded to
2025 10th International Conference on Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC)
189
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 16:18:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 3: SHAP analysis of Smart Farm 1 Dataset
prevent the models from simply learning patterns based on
numbering on speciﬁc IP addresses and ports, which could
lead to overﬁtting or biased predictions. We performed one-
hot encoding to transform the categorical or string values into
integers. The data was then split into training and test sets at a
ratio of 3:1. Again, the training dataset was split into training
and validation sets at 3:1.
Our global model uses a neural network model based on
CNN architecture. The model leverages a CNN to perform
binary classiﬁcation on network data. It is designed to ex-
tract hierarchical feature representations from the input while
preserving computational efﬁciency. The architecture begins
with two convolutional layers interspersed with max-pooling
operations to reduce the temporal dimensions and capture
meaningful local patterns progressively. The output of the
convolutional layers is ﬂattened into a 1D vector and passed
through a fully connected dense layer with 128 neurons and
ReLU activation, which combines the extracted features into a
compact representation. To prevent overﬁtting, a dropout layer
with a rate of 50% is incorporated. The ﬁnal output layer
consists of a single neuron with a sigmoid activation function,
producing a probability score for binary classiﬁcation. The
model is optimized using the Adam optimizer, with binary
cross-entropy as the loss function.
B. Global Explanation
After setting up the global FL model, we compute the SHAP
values to inform the attacks using SHAP’s Deep Explainer.
We used a subsample of smart farm clients’ training data
from the training dataset. This under-sampling is required
due to the resource-intensive nature of computing SHAP
values balanced with the need to create effective adversarial
samples. The summary plots in Fig. 3 illustrate essential
features across the Smart Farm client’s dataset. The X-axis
shows the average magnitude impact on the model output,
with the features arranged by their effect’s magnitude. The key
features identiﬁed in the model trained on Smart Farm1’s client
dataset were predominantly TCP, ICMP and HTTP attributes,
highlighting their signiﬁcance in network trafﬁc analysis. We
used the top four identiﬁed features for each respective client
farm’s dataset to inform the target data poisoning attack.
C. Simulation setup and Attack Settings
In this work, the Flower framework [27], an FL-based
platform, was utilized to implement the proposed algorithm.
Flower supports the Python programming language and en-
ables large-scale FL simulations. It supports various distributed
parameter aggregation algorithms like FedAvg, FedAvgM,
FedAdam, FedBN, and others while seamlessly integrating
with TensorFlow, PyTorch, and scikit-learn. The proposed FL
algorithm was executed on an Intel Core i9 processor with
64 GB of memory, which acted as the central server for
client connections and model aggregation. Two additional Intel
Core i9 processors with 32 GB of memory were used on the
client side. Flower was installed on these machines to facilitate
communication and integration between the server and clients.
The training conﬁguration included a learning rate of 0.001
using the Adam optimizer and a batch size of 32. EarlyStop-
ping and ReduceLROnPlateau were employed to optimize
and speed up the training process of neural network models.
In our research, the attacker uses algorithm 1 to generate
adversarial samples by adding perturbation and accumulating
the velocity vector of the loss function during iteration (Fig.
2). We performed a random search to ﬁnd out the optimal
hyperparameter for our misclassiﬁcation task. For FGSM, the
epsilon (ϵ) is 0.001, and for PGD the epsilon is 0.0001 with
alpha (α) 0.005. We incorporated adversarial samples into 30%
of the training data for each attack. The attacker optimizes FL
learning using the FedAvg algorithm 1 in our experiments.
D. Evaluation Matrices
Gadv.acc denotes the accuracy of the global model when
exposed to an adversarial attack, whereas Gdef.acc represents
the accuracy of the global model after applying adversarial
defense. The improvement in accuracy due to the defense
mechanism is represented by δ, which is computed as: δ =
Gdef.acc −Gadv.acc.
V. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
A. Impact of Adversarial Attacks on Global Federated Learn-
ing Model
Figure 4 compares the global Federated Learning (FL)
model accuracy under normal and adversarial attack scenarios.
Figure 4a illustrates the global model accuracy without an
adversarial attack. Figure 4b and Figure 4c depict the impact
of adversarial attacks on Smart Farm 1 and Smart Farm
2, respectively. Figure 4d demonstrates the global model
2025 10th International Conference on Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC)
190
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 16:18:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
