Drought stress detection technique for
wheat crop using machine learning
Ankita Gupta1, Lakhwinder Kaur1 and Gurmeet Kaur2
1 Computer Science and Engineering, Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab, India
2 Electronics and Communication Engineering, Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab, India
ABSTRACT
The workﬂow of this research is based on numerous hypotheses involving the usage
of pre-processing methods, wheat canopy segmentation methods, and whether the
existing models from the past research can be adapted to classify wheat crop water
stress. Hence, to construct an automation model for water stress detection, it was
found that pre-processing operations known as total variation with L1 data ﬁdelity
term (TV-L1) denoising with a Primal-Dual algorithm and min-max contrast
stretching are most useful. For wheat canopy segmentation curve ﬁt based K-means
algorithm (Cﬁt-kmeans) was also validated for the most accurate segmentation using
intersection over union metric. For automated water stress detection, rapid
prototyping of machine learning models revealed that there is a need only to explore
nine models. After extensive grid search-based hyper-parameter tuning of machine
learning algorithms and 10 K fold cross validation it was found that out of nine
different machine algorithms tested, the random forest algorithm has the highest
global diagnostic accuracy of 91.164% and is the most suitable for constructing water
stress detection models.
Subjects Bioinformatics, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Computer Vision, Data Science, Multimedia
Keywords Wheat, Image processing, Machine learning, Chlorophyll ﬂuoroscence, Drought,
Texture analysis, PSII efﬁciency analysis, PlantCV, Image enhancement, Demonising
INTRODUCTION
Wheat is one of the world’s most extensively consumed staple foods, accounting for
roughly a quarter of total consumption. India is referred to as the “powerhouse of
agriculture” worldwide because it has risen to the top of the worldwide milk, spice, and
pulse production rankings. Furthermore, it is the world’s second-largest wheat producer
after China (Dey, Dinesh & Rashmi, 2020). According to statistics released by the
Population Reference Bureau, the world’s population is expected to have expanded by
approximately 10 billion people by the end of 2050 (Population Reference Bureau, 2021),
boosting the demand for agricultural products. Food security and sovereignty are the
biggest challenges for many countries, especially in the wake of the circumstances
emerging from the Russia-Ukraine conﬂict and climate change (Ben Hassen & El Bilali,
2022). Advancements in the ﬁeld of high-throughput plant phenotyping and machine
learning can help to overcome many of the challenges and streamline the process of
identifying and classifying various biotic and abiotic stresses (Komyshev et al., 2018).
Abiotic stress, such as drought, which is caused by a shortage of water, has been discovered
to cause a considerable drop in wheat production by interfering with wheat crops’
How to cite this article Gupta A, Kaur L, Kaur G. 2023. Drought stress detection technique for wheat crop using machine learning. PeerJ
Comput. Sci. 9:e1268 DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1268
Submitted 12 May 2022
Accepted 10 February 2023
Published 19 May 2023
Corresponding author
Ankita Gupta,
gupta89ankita@gmail.com
Academic editor
Vimal Shanmuganathan
Additional Information and
Declarations can be found on
page 19
DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1268
Copyright
2023 Gupta et al.
Distributed under
Creative Commons CC-BY 4.0
metabolism, growth, and yield. Due to below-average precipitation, droughts cause water
shortages. El Niño occurrences and water abuse can produce droughts. Precipitation, soil
moisture, and streamﬂow indicate drought. Crop growth simulation, water balance, and
crop water stress index models (Landsat Soil Adjusted Vegetation Index (SAVI),
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), and Landsat Enhanced Vegetation
Index (EVI)) can identify wheat drought stress (DROUGHT IN NUMBERS 2022—
restoration for readiness & resilience, 2022). Precipitation, temperature, solar radiation, soil
moisture, evapotranspiration, and crop growth can be utilised to create and validate wheat
drought models. A drought detection model should have accuracy, sensitivity, speciﬁcity,
and missing data handling. Drought stress onset, duration, and severity vary by geography
and climate. Certain factors can help a model detect drought in wheat images, for example
leaf rolling, leaf senescence, leaf water potential, stomatal conductance and chlorophyll
content can distinguish stressed from non-stressed crops. However, using meteorological,
remote sensing, and soil moisture data can help to determine the crop’s water stress status.
Machine learning methods like Random Forest and Neural Networks can help ﬁnd key
traits and classify crops as stressed or unstressed.
Rainfed crops, such as wheat, are particularly vulnerable to unpredictable variations in
the climate. Immediate efforts are required to address this issue before it worsens,
preferably through the development of appropriate early stress detection systems. The
timely detection of water stress in plants has become a matter of concern to avoid short-
term income and yield losses as well as long-term consequences for rainfed farmers, which
could lead to their abandonment of the agricultural profession. According to data from
DEWS (drought early warning systems), around 42 percent of Indian land has been
affected by drought as of January 1, 2019 (van Ginkel & Biradar, 2021; Sharaﬁet al., 2021).
The Drought in Numbers, 2022 report, which was presented on May 11 at the UNCCD’s
15th Conference of Parties (CoP15) (DROUGHT IN NUMBERS 2022—restoration for
readiness & resilience, 2022), provides some signiﬁcant information about the current
drought situation and its effects on the Indian economy. Ever since the beginning of the
twenty-ﬁrst century, the frequency and extent of droughts are growing at an alarming rate
all across the world. India comes under one of the severely drought-impacted countries, as
contains a large portion of the world’s drought-vulnerable regions. Drought affected nearly
two-thirds of the nation from 2020 to 2022. Due to frequent droughts, India’s Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) declined by 2% to 5% between 1998 and 2017 (DROUGHT IN
NUMBERS 2022—restoration for readiness & resilience, 2022). It is crucial to monitor and
analyse drought’s effects on wheat production because climate change is predicted to
worsen drought stress in many locations. To reduce drought stress on wheat production,
there is a need to breed drought-tolerant cultivars, use of precision irrigation, and improve
water management. Drought stress affects 20–30% of the global wheat acreage, limiting
productivity. Semi-arid and arid regions including the mediterranean, Middle East,
Central Asia, and parts of Africa and Australia experience drought stress. Wheat has the
largest water consumption throughout reproductive and grain-ﬁlling stages, making
drought stress more likely. Drought stress can reduce wheat yield by 10–50%, depending
Gupta et al. (2023), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1268
2/24
on severity, timing, and cultivar (DROUGHT IN NUMBERS 2022—restoration for
readiness & resilience, 2022).
Plants can respond to drought stress in a variety of ways, and the major goal of our
research is to understand each part of the wheat plant (Komatsu & Hossain, 2013)
concerning water stress to ﬁnd the responses and changes in different phenomena of the
plant occurring due to stress using high throughput imaging technologies (Abhinandan
et al., 2018; Tounsi, Feki & Brini, 2019). A deeper understanding of this can be
accomplished by familiarising yourself with the full set of biological parameters that can be
monitored with the help of computer algorithms (Gupta, Kaur & Kaur, 2021; Schoppach
et al., 2016). Incorporating the latest phenomics and chlorophyll ﬂuorescence
technological advances into plant research can aid in the understanding and modelling of
the various pressures that plants may encounter during their entire growth cycle. Both
biotic and abiotic stress can be quantiﬁed and monitored using these advancements (Sun
et al., 2020; Tucci et al., 2018). The study of re-emitted light emitted by a plant’s body is one
of the most efﬁcient and straightforward methods of determining stress in plants. Light
energy falling on a plant is diffused in three ways that are all equally important: ﬁrst,
photosynthesis, which is powered by light energy; second heat, which is released as a result
of the dissipation of light energy, and third is chlorophyll ﬂuorescence, which is a re-
emission of light energy, all of which are equally vital (Sánchez-Moreiras et al., 2020).
Wheat crop images are irradiated with photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) between
400 and 700 nm before performing remittance analysis of PSII (Oxborough, 2004; Zhao
et al., 2012). The result of this process leads to the computation of chlorophyll
ﬂuorescence, which is a non-intrusive indicator of photosynthetic activity within the plant.
Fluorescence analysis is one of the simplest methods to determine stress as it accounts
for 1–2 percent of total light energy and offers useful information on photosynthetic
activity and energy loss in the form of heat within the plant body. The digital examination
of the PSII photosystem can be performed using the ﬂuorescence feature analysis of three-
set images (fdark: null image, fmin: image with minimum ﬂuorescence, and fmax: image
with maximum ﬂuorescence). The quantum efﬁciency of photosystem II can be calculated
using the formula fv (variable ﬂuorescence)/fmin, where fv equals the difference between
fmax and fmin ﬂuorescence values (Kalaji et al., 2017; Sid’ko et al., 2017). It refers to the
plant’s ability to adapt to stressful situations. Analysis of the fv/fm distribution patterns in
the plant can quickly reveal the primary stress sources in the plant (Gehan et al., 2017). The
development of machine learning models based on the properties extracted from plant
images for detecting stress is a difﬁcult task. This is due to the fact that identifying the most
appropriate feature to map the ground truth requires a lot of domain knowledge, and at the
same time, mapping concepts of the agricultural processes into the imaging process is hard
(Mantovani, Brito & Mantuano, 2018; Moya et al., 2019). The next section explains the
various options that contemporary researchers are applying to overcome such challenges.
Survey methodology
A discussion on the latest research work done in the context of identifying water stress
using image processing methods is given in this section. Contemporary literature gives
Gupta et al. (2023), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1268
3/24
copious evidence that image-based analysis, which includes high throughput imaging
feature analysis of plants, can be accomplished by applying a variety of functions to the
pixels of the plant (Vadakkenveettil, 2012; Löfstedt et al., 2019). However, the image
processing domain is not without bottlenecks. To overcome the challenge of the
segmentation of plant body parts in plant images, Kienbaum et al. (2021) have used
multiple preprocessing operations. For example, a linear or polynomial thresholding
function may be applied to plant images to correctly identify shoot area, canopy
temperature, and vegetation indices, among other things. The non-linear function analysis
for extracting features from the images has been used in two ways: ﬁrst, through the use of
geometric statistics. Geometric statistics help estimate the height, convex hull, and centre
of mass of the plant body parts. The geometric feature values of the plant that is suffering
from some stress will be different from the healthy body part of the plant. The second is, of
course, through the use of non-geometric descriptors, which can be used to perform biotic
and abiotic stress analysis (Dolferus et al., 2019; Oinam & Mehta, 2020). For example, plant
growth rate prediction, maturity, and yield prediction of wheat are the best indicators of
some stress. These metrics have been used to make the detection of stress more precise, as
it is quite challenging to have high precision agriculture equipment due to the role of
multiple environmental factors. The attempt of many researchers to solve the key
problems of stress detection is by conducting organ-level (leaf, stem, root, and canopy, etc.)
analysis (Chen et al., 2021). However, from contemporary literature, it can be observed that
there is not much agreement given on the kind of imaging features that suit best for the
machine learning models, for the detection of various kinds of stress.
Although the algorithms for segmentation and machine learning are able to directly
handle the input images, it has been noticed that the majority of image processing projects
require some form of pre-processing operation. This is the reason that image
preprocessing activities have an effect on the accuracy of subsequent algorithmic processes,
including machine learning and segmentation. Therefore, the preprocessing algorithms are
a necessary evil in the pipeline and scheme of things to design some kind of image
processing system. This is because they improve the reliability of the image processing
system in terms of their performance. The processes that make up preprocessing are
designed to eliminate difﬁculties associated with low saturation, uneven aspect ratio,
uneven brightness, and various sorts of noises (Li & Xu, 2019; Jin et al., 2018). It also helps
to overcome problems that may occur due to incorrect camera calibrations and the
presence of unwanted objects or artefacts in the image. These problems can be overcome
with the help of this technique. At the same time, it is possible to ﬁnd that resize functions
that use interpolation techniques are used to improve and correct the aspect ratio of the
images (Zhang et al., 2022). Current research in this ﬁeld provides abundant evidence of
the usage of several denoising methods such as median ﬁlter, non-local means ﬁlters (Wu
et al., 2018), gaussian ﬁlter, total variation ﬁlter (Caselles, Chambolle & Novaga, 2015;
Gupta, Kaur & Kaur, 2021; Bose et al., 2016; Fernandez-Gallego et al., 2020; Gupta, Kaur &
Kaur, 2022a; Hasan et al., 2018; Image Completion using Spiking Neural Networks, 2019;
Pineda et al., 2017; Lazarević et al., 2021; Osroosh, Khot & Peters, 2018; Trivedi, Shukla &
Pandey, 2022; Zeng & U, 2020; Zhi, Shi & Sun, 2016), and bilateral ﬁlters to remove the
Gupta et al. (2023), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1268
4/24
noise. In order to get rid of the shadows in the images, low-saturation areas, contrast
enhancement techniques like Min-max and contrast stretching are usually utilised as pre-
processing processes (Trivedi, Shukla & Pandey, 2022). Researchers have developed a
number of different auto correction algorithms in order to improve the images’ colour
balance and achieve uniformity in the illumination and brightness. This will allow for
greater control over how images are displayed.
Further, it can be observed from the current literature that Zeng & U (2020) have
improved linear and non-linear contrast enhancement methods to obtain better
segmentation results. Linear image improvement techniques including min-max
stretching, thresholding function, and percentile stretching use contrast stretching. And
nonlinear approaches like histogram equalisation, and gaussian stretch by analysing
various pipelines in combination with denoising and enhancement gave the best pre-
processing combination for wheat canopy images, which can greatly improve
segmentation accuracy. This can be done using TV L1 denoising with a primal dual
algorithms in combination with max contrast stretching enhancement procedures (Gupta,
Kaur & Kaur, 2022a). By comparing wheat canopy and ear temperatures, wheat ear
detection systems have been developed. Gupta, Kaur & Kaur (2021), Bose et al. (2016),
Hasan et al. (2018), Image Completion using Spiking Neural Networks (2019), Pineda et al.
(2017), Lazarević et al. (2021), Osroosh, Khot & Peters (2018) used the CLAHE method to
improve image local contrast isolate neighbouring ears. Colour threshold segmentation
was employed in HSV colour space to segregate canopy and ear high temperature
disparities. To enrich images, sliding windows and CLAHE contrast adjustment
techniques are used. Wheat ear counting images will have some noise due to the reﬂection
of wheat leaves in sunlight, camera instability, and the natural surroundings. The wheat ear
images needed to be enhanced and denoised using adaptive histogram equalisation and
median ﬁltering.
The colour and vigour of the plant deteriorate as a result of wilting. This can be seen
visually and through the use of computer vision techniques (Gupta, Kaur & Kaur, 2021;
Osroosh, Khot & Peters, 2018). In order to well distinguish between healthy and stressed
plants classiﬁers such as support vector machine, artiﬁcial neural network has been trained
with a speciﬁc set of characteristics that can characterise the histograms generated at the
frequency of F520/F680, results of the analysis demonstrate the utility of multicolour
ﬂuorescence for plant phenotyping (Pineda et al., 2017). Absolute reﬂectance
characteristics such as reﬂectance in red (RRed), green (RGreen), blue (RBlue), near-
infrared (RNIR), and far-red (RFarRed) have also been utilised. Lazarević et al. (2021) have
also employed hue (HUE), saturation (SAT), and value (VAL) as an alternative to visible
reﬂectance for colour analysis. HUE takes into account the red, green, and blue colours,
although it is displayed as a single channel with values ranging from 0 to 360 degrees. For
every colour the saturation (SAT) indicates its intensity (pale or intense colour), while the
value (VAL) indicates whether the colour is bright or dark. According to the results of
colour analysis, reﬂectance in red, green, and blue dramatically increased if there is an
extreme drought. Hence, drought signiﬁcantly affect the colour reﬂectance by boosting the
Gupta et al. (2023), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1268
5/24
