PLENARY SESSION
Remote Detection of Crop Stress: Application to Plant Pathology
J. L. Hatfield
Laboratory Director, National Soil Tilth Laboratory, USDA-ARS, National Soil Tilth Laboratory, 2150 Pammel Drive, Ames,
IA 50011.
Contribution from the USDA-ARS.
Remote sensing carries many different connotations to different 
to changes in intracellular water content and chlorophyll content.
individuals, ranging from photography to large satellite platforms. 
Lesions and reduction in chlorophyll content created by a disease
Each day we are provided many frames of remote sensing informa- 
also cause an increase in reflectance. Water stress by reducing
tion through our eyes, which we use to make visual assessments 
the internal water content increases the reflectance from an indi-
of an object. These scenes provide an information source about 
vidual leaf. Information gathered from individual leaves provides
objects from which we judge certain characteristics, e.g., size, 
a basic set of information about the mechanism of the changes
condition, or change. The local TV weather report uses remote 
occurring within a plant; however, to be of practical application
sensing of clouds to show the passage of storms. Plant pathologists 
it must be extended to a canopy or field level.
have used remote sensing tools for a number of years and were
among the first to use color infrared photography to assess the 
REFLECTION FROM CANOPIES AND FIELDS
presence of disease in trees. The application of remote sensing
via airborne cameras provided an answer to a question that would 
Composites of leaves or canopies exhibit the same reflective
not have been possible through ground surveys. In many aspects 
properties of individual leaves; however, there are a series of vari-
we have progressed rapidly to our current state of knowledge 
ables that now must be considered. Leaf orientation, i.e., the
about the utility of remote sensing. The intent of this address 
arrangement of leaves on the stem and orientation to the sun,
is to arouse the interest of individuals in discovering how remote 
provides a source of variation when viewing a canopy compared
sensing could be applied to plant pathological problems of today 
with an individual leaf. Also, all leaves are not exposed to the
and tomorrow. 
same level of incoming radiant energy and often do not reflect
back to the sky due to distortions in the leaf surface. Leaf surfaces
REGIONS OF THE SPECTRUM 
often act as polarizing filters and reflect back to portions of the
sky that are not always detected by viewing the canopy only
The spectrum of electromagnetic radiation ranges from the 
from the vertical direction. However, the information contained
short, high energy wavelengths to the long radio waves. As a 
in bidirectional and polarized reflectance has yet to be fully ex-
receptor, the human eye only measures a relatively small portion 
ploited in the evaluation of canopy response to stress. Leaf
of the spectrum in the visible wavelengths from 0.4 to 0.7 gtm. 
fluorescence is another attribute that has been observed in all
Remote sensing instruments, on the other hand, have utilized 
plants and can be related to the efficiency of the photosynthetic
wavelengths extending in the microwave region for a variety of 
process. It is possible that leaf fluorescence could be used to
applications. For this discussion, we will confine the wavelengths 
assess the impact of diseases on the physiological status of a
to the region from 0.4 to 14 /im. The region from 0.4 to 5 /Mm 
plant. This technique has only been used on individual leaves;
can be represented as the reflected wavelengths. Reflection is that 
however, it could be extended to canopies through the use of
phenomenon in which an impinging beam of radiation of a 
laser-induced fluorescence. This procedure will have to be adapted
particular wavelength is reflected back away from the object 
to plant canopies but may become a powerful and useful research
without any change. This can be contrasted to emittance, which 
tool.
is the emitting of radiant energy at a particular wavelength due 
Canopies of plants are grown in fields with varying soil, and
to the temperature of an object. Surfaces at the temperature of 
soil also has some unique reflective properties. The variation
the earth (300' K) emit mostly in 10-12 4m waveband, while the 
across wavelengths is less for soil than for leaves; however, the
sun at 60000K emits in the 0.5 pm region. Both reflectance and 
reflectance changes in response to modifications in the surface.
emittance provide information that can be utilized in applying 
The addition of organic matter as residue on the surface reduces
remote sensing to agricultural problems. 
the reflectance. Soils vary in reflectance due to mineral com-
position and weathering of the minerals. However, across the
REFLECTION FROM LEAVES 
visible and near-infrared wavelengths the reflectance from soil
remains relatively constant within a given soil type. Changes in
Reflection from individual leaves is not constant across the 
water content in the upper 2 mm cause the largest variation in
wavelengths from 0.4 to 2.5 ym. Leaves have a low reflectance 
reflectance. Water has a low reflectance and the addition of a
in the visible (0.4-0.7 /m), a high reflectance in the near-infrared 
water film around the soil aggregate causes an increased absorp-
(0.7-1.2 Mm), and a low reflectance in the middle and far infrared 
tion of the incident radiation. As a soil is wetted there is a dark-
(1.2 Mm) wavebands. This variation in leaf reflectance has allowed 
ening in the color, which lightens as the soil dries. This variation
for the differentiation of leaves from soil, which tends to show 
in the reflectance from soils due to changing soil water adds
little variation in reflectance across these wavelengths, 
complexity to the reflectance from canopies, particularly when
Reflectance from leaves is species dependent and sometimes 
there is less than complete ground cover by the plant, i.e., exposed
cultivar dependent. The primary variation among species is in 
soils when viewed from above the plant. Since there is a changing
the visible reflectance and is due to species or leaf age. Reflectance 
amount of plant material both in the adding of new leaves or
tends to increase in individual leaves as the leaf matures; however, 
the senescence of the older leaves, there is a continually changing
the changes are wavelength dependent. These changes are due 
scene to be viewed. This challenge must be faced and understood
if we are to develop the tools that allow us to assess the effect
of a disease or any other stress on the plant.
This article is in the public domain and not copyrightable. It may be freely 
Instruments available for the measurement of reflected radiation
reprinted with customary crediting of the source. The American 
adaptable to remote sensing range from the portable spectro-
Phytopathological Society, 1990. 
radiometer, which measures all wavelengths between 0.4 and 1.1
Vol. 80, No. 1, 1990 
37
/tm to radiometers with multiple channels set for discrete wave- 
one without water will be the warmest possible under a given
bands. Instruments with individual channels mimic the wavebands 
set of conditions. It is this relationship that has allowed foliage
available on the current satellites. A rapidly emerging technology 
temperature to be effectively used in the estimation of transpira-
that has yet to be applied is the use of multiple waveband video 
tion from canopies. Also, any factor that disrupts this water flow
cameras. This system offers a capability not possible with other 
to the leaf, e.g., vascular diseases, root diseases, or diseases that
radiometers, in that the data are readily available for viewing 
disrupt the stomatal action, will cause the foliage temperature
without intense signal processing and manipulation. Video camera 
to be higher than that observed in healthy foliage. We have been
systems may provide a practical tool for disease assessment, 
successful in using foliage and canopy temperature in evapo-
transpiration models for a variety of crops. In well-irrigated crop
VEGETATIVE INDICES 
canopies, the variation across a field is relatively uniform and
the variation increases with increasing soil water deficits. As with
To use the information contained in the reflectance across 
the reflected radiation, the change in field variability may be useful
wavelengths, several vegetative indices have been proposed and 
in defining the characteristics of a given field.
evaluated. These indices are based primarily on the ratio or dif-
ference between the reflectance in the near-infrared and red wave-
lengths. The approaches range from simple ratios of near-infrared/ 
CROP STRESS INDICES
red reflectance to a calculation of the matrix coefficients for the
use of four wavebands. Each index provides a description of the 
To improve the efficiency of using foliage temperatures, several
canopy response throughout a growing season. The ratio vegeta- 
crop water stress indices have been proposed and evaluated since
tive index (near-infrared/red ratio) is related to the change in 
the middle 1970s. These became possible at this time due to the
leaf area index, while the normalized difference [(near-infrared 
development of the accurate, portable, hand-held infrared thermo-
-
red)/(near-infrared + red)] is more appropriately related to 
meter. At first, the comparison was made between the foliage
the interception of photosynthetically active radiation. To account 
and air temperature (Tf -
Ta), since this form was the integral
for the soil background the perpendicular vegetative index was 
part of the energy exchange process. It was found that although
developed to account for a changing soil background due to sur- 
the Tf -
Ta differences were related to crop yield induced by
face soil water content changes. There have been several other 
water stress, the relationships were site dependent. Further de-
indices developed to describe how the changing reflective proper- 
velopment and study revealed that other environmental variables
ties change with growth of the plant. 
were needed to fully interpret foliage temperatures and develop
Observed changes in the vegetative index, in particular, the 
less site-specific relationships. The primary variables were net
ratio vegetative index and the normalized vegetative index have 
radiation, wind speed, and vapor pressure deficit. These stress
shown unique seasonal patterns. The patterns of both indices 
indices have been based on the energy exchange principles between
show an increase with the developing canopy and a hysteresis 
the foliage and the surrounding atmosphere. Any factor that
effect during senescence because plant material remains standing 
affects the rate of water movement to the leaf has an impact
in the field, which has different reflective properties than the soil 
on the foliage temperature. For example, the addition of high
in the background. Over fields of seemingly uniform conditions 
salt content irrigation even in large amounts causes the foliage
there is considerable variation in the observed signal whether 
temperatures to be warmer than those plants irrigated with the
the data are collected with hand-held, boom-mounted, or aircraft- 
same volume of salt-free water.
mounted systems. The variation is typically 10% of the field mean. 
Recent research has identified that plants have biochemical
However, the change in spatial variability may be one of the 
temperature optima that define the optima temperature for plant
methods that could be effectively used to monitor the changes 
growth. Combining foliage temperature with these predetermined
that occur within fields as a result of disease. Most diseases do 
optima temperatures provides another description of plant stress.
not infect a whole field uniformly and thus could induce a change 
It has been found that plants with maximum growth in a particular
in the field pattern. Even on a single sample event this method 
environment have the minimum amount of time outside of this
could provide valuable information given a priori knowledge 
predetermined thermal range. For cotton, this range was deter-
about the expected level of field variability, 
mined to be 23-30 C and for wheat 18-25 C. This range has
been defined as the thermal kinetic window and is based on the
biochemical efficiency of a particular plant. The utility of this
EMITTED RADIATION 
stress index has yet to be fully evaluated; however, it offers a
method of linking the plant response to an observed parameter,
All objects that have a temperature emit radiation according 
e.g., foliage temperature.
to Planck's Law. Soil and plant canopies emit energy, and given 
Other methods that can be used are to calculate the canopy
the temperatures found on the earth's surface, range in the 10-14 
resistance to water vapor exchange. It is known that many diseases
bm waveband. Temperature of a plant canopy can be described 
affect the stomatal resistance and the combination energy balance
by either the temperature of individual leaves, the temperature 
and observed foliage temperature provide a method of estimating
of foliage, or the temperature of the canopy that includes the 
canopy resistance. These techniques, however, are yet to be applied
soil. Leaf temperatures that have been measured relative to the 
to any measure of disease. They may offer the potential of quanti-
occurrence of Verticillum wilt or brown rot of soybeans (Phialo- 
fying the degree of stress or level of infection in ways that have
phora gregata Gans) have been measured with attached leaf 
not been possible before.
thermocouples. Other measurements of Verticillum wilt have been 
The instruments available for measuring the foliage temperature
made with infrared thermometers. Each method has provided 
range from hand-held portable units, to fixed, battery-powered
a unique relationship of describing the change in leaf temperature 
systems to airborne or satellite thermal scanners systems. The
relative to the presence of a disease. 
latter are relatively expensive and can view large areas if repeated
coverage is obtained, e.g., NOAA or GOES satellites. Smaller
ENERGY EXCHANGE PROCESSES 
areas are covered with systems that provide less frequent coverage,
e.g., LANDSAT or SPOT. The variation within a scene of data
Temperatures of the leaf, foliage, or canopy are a result of 
obtained with an airborne or satellite system will not permit the
the energy exchange process. The observed temperatures are a 
reliable detection of the onset of a disease. The handheld or fixed
result of the partitioning between the sensible and latent heat 
units on the ground may be useful in a research setting to determine
exchanges and therefore are a balance between the energy im- 
the casual relationships and the development of a monitoring
pinging on the leaf or foliage and the water available for evapora- 
program where a problem is suspected. Each of these instruments
tion. Simply stated then, a surface with a free water surface will 
require some training to most properly collect and interpret the
be as cool as possible given the meteorological conditions while 
data.
38 
PHYTOPATHOLOGY
TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL VARIATION 
Given this knowledge then, one may use a direct monitoring
program to measure the extent of a disease, e.g., Phytophthora
Both the temporal and spatial attributes of remote sensing 
spp. on soybeans or Fusarium spp. on beans, which cause a reduc-
techniques detect unique features about the surface being ob- 
tion in leaf area. The spatial sampling capability provides an
served. Satellites that provide repeated coverage of the earth have 
assessment not possible with ground monitoring.
allowed assessments to be made of the changes that have occurred 
The indirect method would involve interpretation of deviations
over a period of months or years. The same factors apply when 
from the expected case either in temporal or spatial patterns.
applying remote sensing to the monitoring of agricultural fields, 
For example, an increase in foliage temperature in a field with
forests, and native or managed grasslands. The value of repeated 
an adequate soil water supply would signal a potential problem
coverage has provided for a unique glimpse at the ecosystem 
that could invoke a monitoring effort. An unexplained change
that we are trying to monitor. 
in leaf area or wilting resulting in a change in reflectance could
Temporal variations can be large because the system to which 
signal a problem before complete infestation. The utilization of
we are applying may be changing due to the normal progression 
both indirect and direct methods will require imagination and
of growth. However, we know what patterns to expect and devia- 
dedication to the problem by a number of researchers.
tions away from that pattern provide an investigative tool. Like-
wise, changes in the spatial patterns may signal a potential problem
within a given field or ecosystem. The interpretation of the tem- 
THE CHALLENGE FOR THE FUTURE
poral and spatial pattern will require some experience but may
provide an indication of a problem not possible before this 
Remote sensing is a technology and not the complete answer.
information was made available. 
As a tool it provides information about the particular system
in a way not possible through other avenues. The use of remote
INTEGRATING REMOTE SENSING INTO 
sensing, crop models, and meteorological data may be most
PLANT PATHOLOGY 
efficiently used to predict the conditions in which a particular
disease may occur and forecast the occurrence, rather than the
There are two avenues in which remote sensing information, 
monitoring, of possible infestations. The advantage of remote
either reflected or emitted radiation, can be incorporated into 
sensing information lies in its combination with other available
disease monitoring. The two approaches involve either direct or 
information. If we are to fully use that information then indi-
indirect methods of evaluating the disease occurrence and extent. 
viduals with varied disciplinary backgrounds interested in solving
Given the number of factors that cause variation in both the 
a problem will have to develop those answers. We have the
reflected and emitted radiation signals it is unlikely that the direct 
capability, the tools, and the scientists with imagination-all that
monitoring method will be useful. Both the indirect and direct 
is required is to bring all of the ingredients together. This is our
methods require a priori knowledge that a condition may exist, 
greatest challenge and from it will emerge the largest rewards.
Vol. 80, No. 1, 1990 
39
