Citation: Chandel, N.S.; Rajwade,
Y.A.; Dubey, K.; Chandel, A.K.;
Subeesh, A.; Tiwari, M.K. Water
Stress Identiﬁcation of Winter Wheat
Crop with State-of-the-Art AI
Techniques and High-Resolution
Thermal-RGB Imagery. Plants 2022,
11, 3344. https://doi.org/10.3390/
plants11233344
Academic Editors: John T. Hancock
and Mikihisa Umehara
Received: 8 October 2022
Accepted: 27 November 2022
Published: 2 December 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
plants
Article
Water Stress Identiﬁcation of Winter Wheat Crop with
State-of-the-Art AI Techniques and High-Resolution
Thermal-RGB Imagery
Narendra S. Chandel 1, Yogesh A. Rajwade 2,*
, Kumkum Dubey 1, Abhilash K. Chandel 3,4,*
, A. Subeesh 1
and Mukesh K. Tiwari 5
1
Agricultural Mechanization Division, ICAR—Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering,
Bhopal 462038, MP, India
2
Irrigation and Drainage Engineering Division, ICAR—Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering,
Bhopal 462038, MP, India
3
Department of Biological Systems Engineering, Virginia Tech Tidewater AREC, Suffolk, VA 23437, USA
4
Center for Advanced Innovation in Agriculture (CAIA), Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
5
College of Agricultural Engineering and Technology, Anand Agricultural University, Godhra 389001, GJ, India
*
Correspondence: yogesh.rajwade@icar.gov.in (Y.A.R.); abhilashchandel@vt.edu (A.K.C.)
Abstract: Timely crop water stress detection can help precision irrigation management and minimize
yield loss. A two-year study was conducted on non-invasive winter wheat water stress monitoring
using state-of-the-art computer vision and thermal-RGB imagery inputs. Field treatment plots were
irrigated using two irrigation systems (ﬂood and sprinkler) at four rates (100, 75, 50, and 25% of crop
evapotranspiration [ETc]). A total of 3200 images under different treatments were captured at critical
growth stages, that is, 20, 35, 70, 95, and 108 days after sowing using a custom-developed thermal-
RGB imaging system. Crop and soil response measurements of canopy temperature (Tc), relative
water content (RWC), soil moisture content (SMC), and relative humidity (RH) were signiﬁcantly
affected by the irrigation treatments showing the lowest Tc (22.5 ± 2 ◦C), and highest RWC (90%)
and SMC (25.7 ± 2.2%) for 100% ETc, and highest Tc (28 ± 3 ◦C), and lowest RWC (74%) and SMC
(20.5 ± 3.1%) for 25% ETc. The RGB and thermal imagery were then used as inputs to feature-
extraction-based deep learning models (AlexNet, GoogLeNet, Inception V3, MobileNet V2, ResNet50)
while, RWC, SMC, Tc, and RH were the inputs to function-approximation models (Artiﬁcial Neural
Network (ANN), Kernel Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Logistic Regression (LR), Support Vector Machine
(SVM) and Long Short-Term Memory (DL-LSTM)) to classify stressed/non-stressed crops. Among
the feature extraction-based models, ResNet50 outperformed other models showing a discriminant
accuracy of 96.9% with RGB and 98.4% with thermal imagery inputs. Overall, classiﬁcation accuracy
was higher for thermal imagery compared to RGB imagery inputs. The DL-LSTM had the highest
discriminant accuracy of 96.7% and less error among the function approximation-based models for
classifying stress/non-stress. The study suggests that computer vision coupled with thermal-RGB
imagery can be instrumental in high-throughput mitigation and management of crop water stress.
Keywords: winter wheat; crop water stress; canopy temperature; computer vision; irrigation
management
1. Introduction
Water stress forces leaf stomata closure, which reduces transpiration and increases
canopy temperature (Tc) [1]. Timely estimation of those stressors may not only help preci-
sion irrigation management but also minimize yield losses [2]. The penalty gap between
actual and potential yield will widen further as a result of climate change that projects
a decline in rainfall frequency, and rising ambient temperatures [3]. Water stress is typ-
ically assessed using xylem water potentials [4], canopy thermometry [5], and stomatal
Plants 2022, 11, 3344. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants11233344
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/plants
Plants 2022, 11, 3344
2 of 21
conductance measurements [6]. However, these methods are often invasive and tend
to have limited sampling accuracy due to low throughput or point data acquisitions [7].
Non-invasive proximal or remote sensing techniques have emerged as high throughput
alternatives for monitoring crop water stress through color features, reﬂectance, and ther-
mal emissivity of the vegetable, fruit, and specialty crops [8–10]. However, monitoring
crop water content using visible-range RGB imaging not only requires speciﬁc leaf ori-
entation relative to the camera but also pre-deﬁned illumination conditions. This limits
the applicability of RGB imaging to determine water content in ﬁeld conditions. Using
scanner-type imaging devices could be a cost and time-effective alternative [11]. Unlike
thermometry, Tc from thermal infrared imagery reﬂects upon the entire canopy emissivity
proﬁle, which is directly proportional to the canopy water content [9]. Thermal imagery
(8000–14,000 nm) also outperforms color RGB imagery (400–700 nm), and reﬂectance char-
acteristics in terms of robustness to characterize crop water stress [8,9]. Nonetheless, the
adaptability of thermal imaging in agricultural production management is still at a nascent
stage and is consistently evolving to maintain imaging quality against drastic variations
in relative humidity and wind speeds. Thermal imaging cameras are also relatively more
expensive than simple-to-operate RGB cameras. It is for these reasons; thermal imaging
is still limitedly adopted as a golden standard for crop stress mapping. Above all, long-
wave infrared wavelengths (thermal imaging) have a higher penetrating capability over
visible-range wavelengths, making them more reliable and sensitive to crop water content
variations. Thermal imaging is therefore a better alternative for precision irrigation man-
agement unlike RGB imaging or using standard crop coefﬁcients coupled with reference
evapotranspiration [8,9].
RGB imagery has been used to assess crop water stress using different deep learning
(DL) and machine learning (ML) techniques [10,12,13]. ML techniques derive unique
features from input and output datasets, which could be used for discrimination between
different object types or classes. ML techniques such as Naïve Bayes, artiﬁcial neural
networks (ANNs), support vector machine (SVM), and random forests (RFs) have been
widely used with RGB images for weed detection, biotic and abiotic stress identiﬁcation
and/or classiﬁcation, yield predictions, and other crop phenotyping applications [14,15].
Thermal imagery has also been used with RFs and decision trees for crop water status
monitoring in the vineyard and automated irrigation scheduling [16]. However, there are
several limitations associated with ML techniques. The output quality is highly dependent
on input data quality, the presence of noise and outliers, and other unaccounted biases
that have been reported to signiﬁcantly affect the model performance. Furthermore, ML
techniques also require skilled operators [17] for deﬁning input features that may also often
affect the model performances through unintentional subjectivity and bias [10,12].
DL has emerged as an advanced vision-based learning technique that enables au-
tomated feature extraction without human dependencies unlike ML [18]. Pertinent to
agricultural applications, crop phenological stages have been detected using a deep con-
volution neural network (DCNN) trained on RGB imagery [19,20]. Similarly, different DL
techniques (AlexNet, GoogLeNet, and Inception V3) have also been used to classify non-
stressed and water-stressed soybean, maize, and okra crops with digital RGB images [10].
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) is a novel DL approach (DL-LSTM) that has been used
for different ﬁeld applications like time series forecasting of wheat yield and productiv-
ity [21], irrigation requirement [22], predicting agricultural product sale volumes based
on seasonal and historical data [23], and identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of weeds [24].
Most of the image processing studies have used RGB images (or visible range imagery) to
classify crop water stress [25,26]. Thermal imagery has been reported to be more robust
for crop water stress characterization compared to RGB or multispectral imagery [27,28].
This is majorly due to the fact that the canopy emissivity can be highly sensitive to water
content [8,9,29,30].
So far, crop water stress characterization has been carried out through traditional
and destructive methods that often have restricted commercial applicability. Moreover,
Plants 2022, 11, 3344
3 of 21
these techniques have been limitedly explored using robust computer-vision techniques
(ML or DL models) for thermal infrared imagery inputs. Small unmanned aerial system
(UAS)-based thermal and multispectral remote sensing is also being explored for high
throughput crop water stress phenotyping. However, the frequency of data acquisition
is limited to once or a few times a day and atmospheric interferences including weather
conditions may severely impact the quality of thermal imaging. Additionally, onboard
data processing potential for complex and robust algorithms is still limited for small UASs.
Contrarily, proximal thermal imaging is subjected to the least atmospheric interference
and imaging frequency constraints. These systems can continuously collect data at critical
growth stages and also offer ﬂexibility for custom modiﬁcation to implement onboard edge
processing algorithms for real-time decision support and management actuation. On the
cost side, thermal and RGB imaging sensors and the UASs are still far more expensive than
the proximal imaging systems, which can be custom-assembled using miniature sensing
modules. However, such miniature sensing modules neither offer sufﬁcient resolution nor
desired image quality when integrated with UASs.
Obtaining robust data handling and the analytical pipeline is the major obstacle to
deriving real-time decision support for crop management but is achievable using custom-
assembled edge devices. This study is a step toward alleviating those obstacles and
focuses on the evaluation of non-invasive and cost-effective thermal-RGB imaging with
robust ML and DL models for stress characterization in winter wheat crops. This could
be critical from a precision irrigation scheduling and management perspective and may
potentially have high grower adaptability. Speciﬁc objectives for this two-year study were
to (a) non-invasively assess the crop responses to two irrigation systems and four deﬁcit
irrigation treatments, and (b) identify the water-stressed and non-stressed crops by feature
extraction using thermal-RGB imagery and function approximation approaches using crop
physiological parameters and ambient weather inputs.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Experiment Design
Winter wheat (Triticum aestivum L., cv. HI 1544) was planted (November to April,
2019–2020, and 2020–2021) in the research farm (77.24◦E, 23.18◦N) of the Central Institute
of Agricultural Engineering (CIAE), ICAR Bhopal, India (Figure 1). The meteorological
data are being recorded at the institute observatory since 1985. According to Koppen’s
classiﬁcation (1934), Bhopal is a Mediterranean climatic zone with an average annual
rainfall of about 1127 mm. The soil type is heavy clay (Vertisols) with clay content over 50%
and moderate fertility with negligible salinity. Soil structure is sub-angular blocky with a
ﬁeld capacity of 29.5–32% (db) and wilting point of 18-19.5% (db). The average inﬁltration
and percolation rates of the soil are 10–12 mm day−1 and 6.3–7.0%, respectively. The plots
were irrigated using ﬂood and sprinkler systems at four treatment rates: 100, 75, 50, and
25% of full crop evapotranspiration (ETc). Micro sprinklers of 120 lph discharge capacity
(Make: Netaﬁm) were installed at 3.5 m spacing. The reference crop evapotranspiration was
calculated using weather data with the FAO56 Penman–Montieth method and standard
non-stressed crop coefﬁcient [31]. The seasonal ETc of wheat during the ﬁrst and second
years of growth was 380 mm and 345 mm, respectively. The application efﬁciencies of
0.65 for ﬂood irrigation and 0.90 for sprinkler irrigation were used as determined from
the experiment trials on the same site using the measurements of water applied and the
water retained in the crop root zone. A total of six irrigation cycles were implemented for
100% ETc treatment (non-stressed) at sowing, crown root initiation (CRI), tillering, booting,
ﬂowering, and grain ﬁlling stages. One to three irrigation cycles were implemented for
deﬁcit treatments (75, 50, and 25% of ETc) at jointing, booting, and ﬂowering stages.
Plants 2022, 11, 3344
4 of 21
 
Figure 1. Experimental layout of the winter wheat crop irrigated at different rates using sprinkler
and ﬂood irrigation systems [32]. R—Replicates. Layout is prepared over google map.
2.2. Data Collection
RGB and thermal imagery were synchronously captured using a multifunctional cus-
tom integrated thermal-RGB imaging system. The system has a single board computer (B+,
Raspberry Pi foundation), a thermal imaging module (8000–14,000 nm, HTPA, Heimann,
Pixel resolution: 80 × 64, Horizontal and vertical FOV: 120◦× 90◦), an RGB imaging mod-
ule (400–700 nm, Raspberry Pi V2, Sony IMX219, Raspberry Pi foundation, Pixel resolution:
3280 × 2464, HFOV: 62.2◦, VFOV: 48.8◦), a GPS receiver module (NEO 6M V2, Adafruit)
for image geotagging, a capacitive touchscreen (LCD 800 × 400 mm, Robokit), a keypad
(Robokits), and a power source (20,000 mAh, 5V/2A, MI power bank). The computer
used the NOOBS operating system with module-pertinent libraries for different operations.
Imagery data were collected at critical crop growth stages in the 2019 and 2020 growing
seasons (ﬁve times in each season). Ground truth plant biophysical and soil parameters
were also measured synchronously.
2.2.1. Imagery Data
The developed imaging system was placed 1 m from the crop and titled at 45◦from
the horizontal. A total of 3200 images (400 per treatment) were acquired (1600 RGB
and 1600 thermal) in two seasons at Crown root initiation (20 days after sowing (DAS)),
tillering (35 DAS) (Figure 2), jointing (70 DAS), ﬂowering and milking (95 DAS), and dough
(108 DAS) stages, between 11 am to 1 pm on clear sky days. Sample masked thermal and
RGB canopy images for model training are shown in Figure 2.
2.2.2. Weather and Ground Truth Data
Weather data were acquired for the imaging days from a standard station (Indian
Meteorological Department, Pune, India) installed at 300 m from the study site. The
parameters included, pan evaporation (mm/day), rainfall (mm), maximum and minimum
air temperature (◦C), relative humidity (RH, %), and wind velocity (m/s). The ambient
and soil ground truth data of air temperature (Ta), RH, and soil moisture content (SMC)
were collected for each treatment plot during the imaging campaigns each year. The Ta
and RH parameters were recorded using the DHT22 module (Adafruit, New York, NY,
Plants 2022, 11, 3344
5 of 21
USA). SMC was monitored in the root zone depth (0–150 mm typical to wheat crops
grown in the experimental site, soil type: vertisols) using a soil moisture meter of 200 mm
sensing probe length (ICT, MPM-160-B, Armidale, Australia). The probe was inserted at
ﬁve different locations in each replication for measurement of soil moisture, acquiring 15
data points of soil moisture content per measurement. The relative water content (RWC)
of leaves was calculated as the crop ground truth data [33]. For this, 10 matured and fully
expanded leaves from each sample plot were collected and fresh weight was recorded on
each sampling date, immediately following the imagery acquisition. Collected samples
were then oven-dried at 70 ◦C, dry weight was recorded, and RWC was calculated. A
total of 30 samples were collected per treatment per campaign amounting to a total of
150 samples per treatment in each year for RWC calculations. End-season yield was also
recorded from 2 × 2 m areas from three plots in each replication, making nine sample
points (36 m2 area) per treatment to characterize the effects of crop water stress.
 
Figure 2. Sample raw and canopy masked RGB images ((a) non-stressed; (b) stressed) and thermal
images ((c) non-stressed, (d) stressed) captured 35 days after sowing. Pseudo-color thermal images
here are only for presentation and were scaled between 10 ◦C (RGB: [25, 25, 113]) and 80 ◦C (RGB:
[235, 246, 255]).
2.2.3. Statistical Analysis
The impact of irrigation type (ﬂood and sprinkler), rate (100, 75, 50, and 25% ETc),
and interaction of both on crop biophysical parameters were statistically evaluated using a
one-way analysis of variance at a 5% level of signiﬁcance [34].
2.3. Crop Water Stress Classiﬁcation
Two different approaches (1) feature extraction-based (DL models: AlexNet, GoogLeNet,
Inception V3, MobileNet V2, and ResNet50) and (2) function approximation-based ML
models (Artiﬁcial neural network (ANN), K-nearest neighbors (KNN), Support vector
machine (SVM), and Logistic regression (LR)); and a DL model (DL-LSTM) were adopted
for crop water stress classiﬁcation. Feature extraction-based models were trained on thermal
as well as RGB imagery. Function approximation-based models were trained on ambient
weather and soil parameters, and Tc inputs from thermal imagery.
Deep CNNs typically have complex architecture and some may require signiﬁcant
computational resources. All CNN model training and validation processes were performed
on a desktop computer (Intel Core I7 Processor with base frequency 2.60 GHz, 16 GB RAM,
6 GB NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1660 Ti GPU) with Windows 10 operating system (64 bits).
