Citation: Elvanidi, A.; Katsoulas, N.
Machine Learning-Based Crop Stress
Detection in Greenhouses. Plants
2023, 12, 52. https://doi.org/
10.3390/plants12010052
Academic Editors: Lingfeng Duan
and Hui Feng
Received: 14 November 2022
Revised: 12 December 2022
Accepted: 14 December 2022
Published: 22 December 2022
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
plants
Article
Machine Learning-Based Crop Stress Detection in Greenhouses
Angeliki Elvanidi and Nikolaos Katsoulas *
Laboratory of Agricultural Constructions and Environmental Control, Department of Agriculture Crop Production
and Rural Environment, University of Thessaly, Fytokou Str., 38446 Volos, Greece
* Correspondence: nkatsoul@uth.com; Tel.: +30-2421093249
Abstract: Greenhouse climate control systems are usually based on greenhouse microclimate settings
to exert any control. However, to save energy, water and nutrients, additional parameters related
to crop performance and physiology will have to be considered. In addition, detecting crop stress
before it is clearly visible by naked eye is an advantage that could aid in microclimate control.
In this study, a Machine Learning (ML) model which takes into account microclimate and crop
physiological data to detect different types of crop stress was developed and tested. For this purpose,
a multi-sensor platform was used to record tomato plant physiological characteristics under different
fertigation and air temperature conditions. The innovation of the current model lies in the integration
of photosynthesis rate (Ps) values estimated by means of remote sensing using a photochemical
reﬂectance index (PRI). Through this process, the time-series Ps data were combined with crop leaf
temperature and microclimate data by means of the ML model. Two different algorithms were
evaluated: Gradient Boosting (GB) and MultiLayer perceptron (MLP). Two runs with different
structures took place for each algorithm. In RUN 1, there were more feature inputs than the outputs
to build a model with high predictive accuracy. However, in order to simplify the process and develop
a user-friendly approach, a second, different run was carried out. Thus, in RUN 2, the inputs were
fewer than the outputs, and that is why the performance of the model in this case was lower than
in the case of RUN 1. Particularly, MLP showed 91% and 83% accuracy in the training sample, and
89% and 82% in testing sample, for RUNs 1 and 2, respectively. GB showed 100% accuracy in the
training sample for both runs, and 91% and 83% in testing sample in RUN 1 and RUN 2, respectively.
To improve the accuracy of RUN 2, a larger database is required. Both models, however, could easily
be incorporated into existing greenhouse climate monitoring and control systems, replacing human
experience in detecting greenhouse crop stress conditions.
Keywords: photosynthesis rate; soft sensor; gradient boosting; multilayer perceptron; microclimate
1. Introduction
The predictions for further population growth up to 20% by 2050 lead to increased
requirements for food production. That is why the greatest challenge for a sustainable
future in the food sector is to produce more products per hectare without further expansion
of the agricultural land and with less environmental impact [1]. In this regard, there is a
need for more circular cropping systems, such as greenhouses and especially hydroponics.
In hydroponics, where plants are cultivated in soilless systems and in a closed environ-
ment, water and nutrients are recycled with a high degree of circularity [2,3]. However, the
existing hydroponic systems are not capable of feeding the growing population. The major-
ity of greenhouse crops are grown in the soil, and to improve productivity, it may be needed
to convert more conventional greenhouses into high-tech and sophisticated systems, while
the climate and fertigation control systems of the existing low-tech greenhouses should be
redesigned and adopted to increase the sustainability of these production systems.
To date, the greenhouse climate and fertigation control is performed on the basis
of a wide variety of environmental controllers supported by automated control models.
Recently, Machine Learning (ML) algorithms have been added in these models to make
Plants 2023, 12, 52. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants12010052
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/plants
Plants 2023, 12, 52
2 of 20
controllers more efﬁcient. Adjusting ML methodologies further reduced agrochemicals,
energy and water inputs to the greenhouse system [3].
However, most of the control systems involve only climate data and do not take into
account the actual physiological status of the crop. The reason of this is that, so far, crop
physiological parameters were measured using time-consuming protocols that are difﬁcult
to apply remotely and in real time. The only physiological parameter adjusted up to now
in recent ML models is leaf temperature [4,5]. It is the only factor that could be measured
remotely providing a database large enough to build a ML model. However, leaf or crop
temperature is an unstable factor which may show an intense variation through the day.
As a result, it cannot be used on its own to estimate different types of crop stress [6]. There
is a need to add an extra crop physiological parameter that could aim to clarify the crop
physiological status. The combination of leaf temperature and photosynthesis rate (Ps)
variation over the day could improve the methodology of detecting a physiological stress
present in the crop.
Recently, a series of agricultural-applied ML models were developed using digi-
tal or hyperspectral data to estimate crop physiological parameters [7,8]. For instance,
Ferentinos [9] developed a standard deep learning model for plant disease identiﬁcation
through visual observations of plant foliage. The model was based on speciﬁc convolutional
neural network architectures.
The majority of these models [10–12], however, are applicable in open-ﬁeld crops
by collecting spatial–spectral data by images recorded either from satellites and drones
or from optical sensors mounted on agricultural tractors. However, this is not the case
for greenhouse crops; but they cannot be used for real-time stress detection, as complex
protocols should be adjusted to the process. In general, the greenhouse structure and the
complex lighting and shading conditions around the crop surface affect the collected image
data. Consequently, the development of climate and crop physiological status monitoring
and control systems for greenhouses is still challenging.
Recently, ‘soft’ sensors (i.e., mathematical models using real-time sensor data) ca-
pable of measuring various crop physiological parameters with the potential to create a
time-series database have been developed [13]. The key is to adjust the spectral–spatial
information obtained by the hyperspectral images into soft sensors protocol. With the
recent integration of the reﬂectance indices in soft sensors, it becomes easier to further
involve the ‘speaking-plant’ approach and more physiological parameters, such as Ps, into
different control processes. In this approach, deliberately exposing crops to low-dose stress
may enhance plant productivity and stress resistance.
Several applications for Machine Learning (ML) do exist, the most signiﬁcant of
which is data mining [14]. Selecting a Machine Learning classiﬁer for a particular task
is challenging [15]. Each system is unique, and each system’s effective parameters are
likewise unique in terms of magnitude and efﬁcacy. Additionally, many other factors may
affect the resulting classiﬁcation performance, including the characteristics of the training
data, user-deﬁned parameter settings, and the predictor variable feature space. According
to the feature characteristics, for instance, if continuous, categorical/discrete or binary data
are processed, a different algorithm is preferred.
Maxwel et al. [16] sustained that among a series of applicable ML algorithms, the most
popular mature ML algorithms are the Support Vector Machine (SVM), the single Decision
Tree (DT), the Random Forest (RF), the Boosted Decision Tree (DT), the Artiﬁcial Neural
Network (ANN), and the k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN). According to Maxwel et al. [16], SVM,
RF, and Boosted DT have been shown to be very powerful methods for classiﬁcation of
remotely sensed data, and in general, these methods appear to produce overall accuracies
that are high compared to alternative machine classiﬁers such as single DT and k-NN.
Among them, Boosted DT was found to be more robust and attractive in small size of
datasets, producing high classiﬁcation accuracy.
Generally, the sample size and quality of training data have an important impact on
classiﬁcation accuracy. As a result, it is preferable to obtain a large number of high-quality
Plants 2023, 12, 52
3 of 20
training samples which fully characterize the class signatures. In greenhouses, however,
there are practical limitations to collecting large and error-free training samples. Usually,
in those systems, the training sample is small in number and data quality is uncertain
due to climatic effect in the remote-sensing process. In this regard, an algorithm that is
robust to these issues should be used, such as Boosting DT methods. ANN algorithms also
perform well under greenhouse conditions, as they can be applied to complex non-linear
problems [17]. Usually, ANN works well with large input data, but it also provides the
same accuracy in a smaller dataset.
The aim of this research was to improve the greenhouse control system adjusting both
climate and crop physiological data. In this sense, robust ML models were developed
(Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and Gradient Boosting (GB)) based on Artiﬁcial Neural
Network and the Classiﬁcation Tree technique. The innovative part of the model is that it
uses Ps data measured remotely, using a photochemical reﬂectance index (PRI), based on a
soft sensor. Here, the measured Ps data were combined with climate and leaf temperature
data using ML models, something that, to the best of our knowledge, is done for the ﬁrst
time. The speciﬁc algorithms were chosen because they can be built quickly to run models
that could be easily connected to existing operational control systems.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Greenhouse Crop and Facilities
The experiments were carried out from May to December of 2020 and from May
to September of 2021, in one of the six compartments of a gothic type greenhouse. The
total ground area of the greenhouse was 1500 m2 (250 m2 for each compartment). The
establishments are located at the facilities of the University of Thessaly, Velestino, Volos
(Latitude 39◦22′, longitude 22◦44′ and altitude 85 m), in the continental area of eastern
Greece. The greenhouse is covered by a highly transparent polyethylene ﬁlm and is
equipped with a pad and fan system, a thermal screen, and heating system. Air temperature
and relative humidity were automatically controlled using a climate control computer
(SERCOM, Automation SL, Netherlands) to achieve optimal indoor climate conditions.
The tomato plants (Solanum lycopersicum cv. Elpida) were cultivated in slabs ﬁlled with
perlite (Perloﬂor Hydro 1, Nordia S.A.; Avlida, Greece). Six crop lines per compartment of
20 m in length and 25 cm in width were cultivated (19 slabs per line, three plants per slab).
The plants were fertigated with a nutrient solution with set points of Electrical Con-
ductivity (EC) around 2 dS m−1 and pH of 5.8. The nutrient solution supplied to the crop
was a standard nutrient solution for tomato grown in open hydroponic systems adapted
to Mediterranean climatic conditions, with the following composition: 5.2 mM L−1 Ca2+,
2.9 mM L−1 Mg2+, 2.5 mM L−1 K+, 1.5 mM L−1Na+, 11mML−1NO3−, 0.8 mML−1 H2PO4−,
23.50 µmM L L−1 Fe, 5.00 µmML−1 Mn, 3.80 µmML−1 Zn. Moreover, the following mi-
cronutrients were added to the nutrient solution: chelated with Ethylenediamine tetraacetic
acid (EDTA) containing Fe 6%, Mn 13%, Zn 15%, B 21%, Cu 0.3%, Mo 0.2%. The nutrient
solution was supplied via a drip system and was controlled by a time-program irrigation
controller (8 irrigation events per day at 07:00, 10:00, 12:00, 14:00, 16:00, 18:00, 19:30 and
03:30, local time; dose 120 mL per plant).
2.2. Experimental Set Up
To build the ML model, recordings of the plants’ physiological responses to their
surrounding microclimate were collected. The tomato plants were exposed to extreme
cultivation conditions, such as (i) low air temperature (LTS treatment), (ii) high air tempera-
ture (HTS treatment), (iii) low nutrient concentration (LNS treatment) in the root zone and
(iv) low water concentration in the root zone (LWS treatment). Additionally, measurements
in (v) of non-stressed (NoS treatment) plants were also recorded.
During the LTS recordings, the air temperature was below 18 ◦C, while the mean value
was around 15 ◦C. The air temperature during the HTS recordings was above 30 ◦C (±2).
In order to impose heat stress conditions on the tomato crop, the greenhouse pad and
Plants 2023, 12, 52
4 of 20
fan system was not used during some summer hot days and only roof ventilation was
performed to cool the greenhouse. In the rest of the treatments, where the air temperature
was not a treatment factor, the air temperature was around 25 ◦C. The well-fertigated, non-
stressed plants, NoS, were irrigated with nutrient solution covering 100% of their water and
nutrient requirements. In the LNS treatment, the plants were irrigated with low nutrient
concentration: 0.83 mM L−1 Ca2+, 0.91 mM L−1 Mg2+, 2.5 mM L−1 K+, 1.5 mM L−1 Na+,
2.48 mM L−1 NO3−, 0.17 µmML−1 Fe. Furthermore, in the LWS treatment, the irrigation
was reduced by 75% compared to that of the non-stressed plants. In this regard, the
irrigation dose decreased from 120 mL per plant to 30 mL per plant. In parallel, the
concentration of the nutrients in the irrigation solution increased accordingly to reach the
target concentration.
The tomato transplanting was performed at the stage of two fully expanded leaves,
while climate and crop physiological measurements started when the crop leaf area index
was approximately 4. To avoid duplication of different types of stress in the cultivation, each
treatment was conducted in a different compartment of the greenhouse. The measurements
started 10 days after treatment initiation and lasted for 20 days. During the experimental
period, measurements of air temperature (Ta; ◦C), relative humidity (RH; %), solar radiation
(SR; W m−2), leaf temperature (TL; ◦C) and photochemical reﬂectance index (PRI) were
collected. The crop measurements were carried out in young and fully developed leaves
between the 3rd and 6th branch of three adjacent tomato plants. A total of 13,828 data
samples of known type of stress were collected over the period of measurements.
2.3. Data Collection and Pre-Processing
A multi-sensor tower was built in order to record crop physiological and microclimate
data (Figure 1b). The tower consisted of two air temperature (Thygro SDI-12, Symmetron,
Gerakas, Greece) and relative humidity (Thygro SDI-12, Symmetron) sensors, a solar
radiation (SP-SS, Apogee Instruments, Logan, UT, USA) sensor, leaf temperature sensors
(Thermocouples, type T, Delta Ltd., Eastvale, CA, USA) and a PRI sensor (type SRS-PRI,
Meter group, Pullman, WA, USA) (Figure 1a).
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1. (a) The set-up of the multi-sensory tower, (b) the tower established within the greenhouse.
The air temperature and relative humidity sensor was placed 1.20 m above the ground
to record the microclimate data in the studied crop zone. The solar radiation was placed
2.0 m above the ground. Four thermocouples were attached to young and fully developed
leaves of the treated plants and the mean value was recorded.
Plants 2023, 12, 52
5 of 20
The remote PRI sensor consisted of an up-looking (incident radiation) and down-
looking (reﬂected radiation) sensor. The two sub-sensors were radiometrically calibrated
by default to a NIST-traceable standard and they were centered at 532 nm and 570 nm
with 10 nm FWHM. The corrected PRI was calculated as the ratio between reﬂected and
incident radiation, measured by down-looking and up-looking sensor, respectively. The
sensor readings upwards and downwards are PRI outputs (Equation (1)):
PRI = (R531 −R570)/(R531 + R570),
(1)
where R is the radiation reﬂectance (W m−2 nm−1) at the speciﬁc wavelength. The up-
looking SRS sensor was mounted 2 m above the canopy with an unobstructed view of the
sky. The down-looking SRS sensor was placed 1.5 m above the ground at a distance of 0.20
m from the crop. The sensor was in a constant 45◦angle from the vertical axis to view the
zone of young, fully developed leaves. The surface area sensed was approximately 2000
mm2. The calibration procedure of the remote PRI sensor followed is presented in detail by
Elvanidi and Katsoulas [13].
According to the calibration process, only the PRI sensor values measured during
periods with solar radiation values above the crop area higher than 100 W m−2 were
considered. That is why only measurements between 6:30 and 18:30, local time, during
each 20-day period were considered. Values for which the SR was below 100 W m−2 during
the reported period (from 6:30 to 18:30, local time) were also removed.
To validate the PRI values recorded remotely (PRIR), measurements of the PRI values
in contact with the leaf (PRIL) were also obtained by a hand-held sensor (PlantPen PRI
Meter, Alpha Omega-Electronics, Madrid, Spain). Additionally, to correlate the PRIR values
with the photosynthesis rate (Ps_mes; µmol m−2 s−1), measurements were taken (Ps_mesP)
using a portable photosynthesis system (LCpro, ADC Bioscientiﬁc Ltd.; Broxbourne, UK).
All measurements were performed in a sample of 20 leaves, under different climatic and
light intensity conditions. The regression equation of the 1st order that occurred between
the datasets was used to calculate the daily variation of Ps_mes and PRIL for the reported
20-day period.
2.4. Calculations
To further validate the accuracy of the Ps_mesR, the recorded values were correlated
with Ps calculated (Ps_cal) according to the following relationship:
P = (αI + Pmax −sqrt((αI + Pmax)2 −4θαIPmax))/2θ,
(2)
where P is the calculated photosynthesis (Ps cal); α is light-limited quantum efﬁciency
(~0.5 µmol (CO2) µmol−1 (photons)); I is the incident PAR radiation in µmol (photons)
m−2 s −1 (in the PAR spectrum 1 W m−2 ~ 2 µmol m−2 s −1); Pmax is the maximum
photosynthesis rate (here considered equal to 30 µmol CO2 m−2 s −1), and θ is the convexity
(here considered equal to 0.7, dimensionless) [18]. This model is known as nonrectangular
hyperbola model, and is used to ﬁt the light-response curves and to estimate photosynthetic
parameters. The Pmax was estimated and calculated by means of the nonlinear least
squares method under high light intensity. The entire process is described in Ma et al. [19]
and Thornley [20].
In addition, two thermal indices were calculated using available measurements of leaf
and air temperature, among other environmental factors.
The crop water stress index CWSI is deﬁned as [21]
CWSI = (Tc −Tm)/(TM −Tm),
(3)
where Tc is the canopy temperature (◦C); TM (◦C) is the higher limit of canopy temperature
which was assumed to be achieved with minimum canopy conductance, and Tm (◦C) is
