Privacy-Preserving Edge Intelligence for 
Agriculture: A 6G-Enabled Federated Learning 
Architecture
Palvancha Shambhavi 
dept. of  CSE-DS                    
Geethanjali College of Engineering and 
Technology                               
Hyderabad, Telangana,India 
pshambavi.cse@gcet.edu.in   
K.A.Jyotsna                                                   
dept.  of  ECE                                      
CVR College of Engineering 
Hyderabad,Telangana,India. 
kajyotsna72@gmail.com     
V.Jyothi 
dept.  of  ECE                       
Vardhaman College of Egineering 
Hyderabad,Telangana,India.  
v.jyothi@vardhaman.org   
S.Kanakaprabha 
Department of CSE (AIML) 
Malla Reddy  College of Engineering 
Secunderabad, Telangana,India 
skanakaprabha@gmail.com    
Mittapally Anusha,                            
dept.  of  IT                                         
Malla Reddy (MR) Deemed to be 
University 
Secunderabad, Telangana,India 
anusha.mitts@gmail.com   
G.Charles Babu 
dept.of  CSE 
Gokaraju Rangaraju Institute of 
Engineering and Technology            
Bachupally,Hyderabad,Telangana 
charles1624@grietcollege.com    
Abstract—The fastest growing wireless communication 
technologies and artificial intelligence are changing the face of 
agriculture making it a highly data intensive industry. 
Scalability, latency, privacy and energy efficiency pose a 
challenge to conventional cloud-centric methods of agricultural 
analytics. This paper introduces a 6G enabled Federated 
Learning (FL) model to large-scale smart agriculture 
applications to overcome these limits. This framework is based 
on the ultra-low latency, massive connectivity, and high 
reliability features of 6G networks that allow solving one of the 
major challenges of machine learning: the ability of distributed 
agricultural apparatus, including IoT sensors, drones, and 
autonomous machinery, to collaboratively learn machine 
learning without exchanging raw data. This methodology 
preserves the privacy of data, leads to reduced communications 
overhead, and real-time decision-making capabilities in 
precision agriculture. The framework offered combines 
intelligent edge computing, blockchain enhanced security, and 
dynamic model combining approaches to process disparate 
sources of data and the changeable nature of agricultural 
settings. Some common applications are measuring the health of 
crops, predictive irrigation control, soil fertility, and detecting 
pests. The simulation findings and the case studies illustrate that 
6G-FL framework can attain high levels of scalability, accuracy 
and very high efficiency in contrast to traditional centralized 
learning paradigms. This study indicates the possible 
applications of 6G and federated intelligence to deploy 
sustainable, 
resilient, 
and 
massive 
smart 
agriculture 
applications into food security in the future. 
Keywords— 6G Network, Federated Learning, Smart 
Agriculture, Edge Computing, Scalability.  
I. INTRODUCTION  
The demand of food production worldwide is going to rise 
immensely as the global population has grown at a high rate 
in a time interval of small property quotient along with 
changes in climate. Availability of resources and labor, as well 
as exposure to environmental changes are some of the 
challenges that tend to plague traditional farming processes 
[1]. This leads to the fact that agriculture currently becomes 
more data-driven and machine-learning-driven with the 
integration of such concepts as the Internet of Things (IoT), 
artificial intelligence, and other high-tech communication 
technologies. Smart agriculture, with the aid of these 
advancements, offers some insights into crop monitoring, 
predictive irrigation, soil health analysis, and control of pests 
and 
improves 
both 
sustainability 
and 
productivity. 
Nevertheless, issues of scalability, efficiencies and data 
privacy of data-driven farming systems continue to be of great 
concern. Recent developments in wireless communication, 
specifically the expected 6G wireless networks brings forth 
unique opportunities to solve these challenges. With a latency 
that is lower than that of 5G, the ability to connect many 
devices and greater reliability, as well as the support of 
artificial intelligence on the border, 6G is on its way to 
becoming the backbone of the next generation agricultural 
ecosystems. 
In 
contrast 
to 
traditional 
cloud-based 
infrastructure [2], where extensive data communication and a 
centralized processing procedure is necessitated, 6G networks 
enable distributed intelligence and analytics at the edge of the 
network, thereby eliminating bottlenecks in communications 
and energy-efficient solutions as well. 
Simultaneously, Federated Learning (FL) has become an 
epic paradigm of collective intelligence on distributed 
machines. Using FL, multiple IoT sensors, drones and 
autonomous agricultural machines can train shared machine 
learning models without exchanging raw data to guarantee 
data privacy, reduce bandwidth costs, and optimize 
generalization of trained models into diverse agricultural 
environments [3]. Integrated with 6G features, FL will be a 
scalable enabler of smart agriculture solutions that can scale 
with multiple data source types, different network conditions, 
and changing farming environments. Although these 
developments have been made, some research gaps still exist. 
The current smart agriculture systems rely heavily on 
centralized architecture that is easily affected by latency, low 
scale capabilities, and vulnerability to cyber-attacks [4]. In 
addition, the heterogeneity of the IoT devices that are 
characterized by limited resources requires adaptive learning 
frameworks that can facilitate efficiency and reliability. 
Integration of blockchain to secure model aggregation, edge 
computing to ensure low-latency processing as well as 
intelligent orchestration of federated learning at large-scale 
agricultural deployments has not been fully exploited. 
This paper presents a Federated Learning framework 
based on 6G enabling scalable smart agriculture applications 
to fill these gaps. The framework tries to leverage the qualities 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Sustainable Communication Networks and Application (ICSCN-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25DW8-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-9420-6
979-8-3315-9420-6/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
318
2025 International Conference on Sustainable Communication Networks and Application (ICSCN) | 979-8-3315-9420-6/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICSCN67106.2025.11308696
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 15:54:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
of 6G connectivity and distributed intelligence to offer secure, 
efficient, and very scalable agricultural solutions. It is 
intended to help critical applications like precision irrigation, 
crop disease detection, soil quality monitoring and yields 
forecasting. The architecture proposed is robust in terms of its 
focus on data privacy, real-time decision-making as well as 
resilience over network variations and hence an ideal solution 
to the challenges of global food security. 
A. Problem Statement 
The recent explosion of smart agriculture has precipitated 
an entrenched use of IoT sensors, UAVs, and remote sensing 
tools that produce sea-worthy volumes of heterogeneous 
agricultural data. This data has an enormous potential to be 
used in crop monitoring, disease detection, irrigation 
management, as well as yield prediction: however, a set of 
important challenges exist that reduce its quality to be adopted 
in building intelligent, scalable, and reliable AI systems. First, 
farmers and other stakeholders do not allow their raw farm 
data to be shared to centralized servers due to data privacy and 
ownership concerns; this inhibits collective intelligence. 
Second, agricultural data tends to be non-IID (non-
independent and identically distributed) and therefore 
centralized or isolated edge training is deemed ineffective [5]. 
Third, the bandwidth and latency constrains in the ruralsettes 
do not allow transmission of large data of raw imagery or 
sensor data to cloud centers even with high 6G connectivity. 
In addition, fairness across the farms which are characterized 
by variability presents yet another design challenge, namely, 
keeping 
the 
latency, 
communication 
efficiency 
and 
trustworthy predictions low. 
The requirements and demand therefore exist to have a 
federated learning framework that can: 
• Maintain privacy through local training models 
without sharing data rawly 
• Compute on IMC-based, non-IID and heterogeneous 
nature of agricultural data across the distributed farms, 
• Use 6G networks to achieve scalable low latency 
collaboration, 
• Minimize communications overhead by using a model 
compression and efficient aggregation. 
• Provide very precise and real-time predicting and 
calibrating outcome that can be relied on in real time 
agricultural decisions. 
Solving this issue will make it possible to develop the scale, 
privacy-preserving, and fair AI-powered solutions that can 
turn the smart agriculture into a sustainable and data-driven 
environment. 
II. LITERATURE SURVEY 
Janga, R., and R Dave, (2025) in [6] present a federated 
learning system of smart farming where it is concerned with 
the scalable and confidential crop disease detection on 
Minnesota farms. Through keeping sensitive agricultural 
information on-site and update shared models in a 
collaborative manner by using local deep learning, transfer 
learning, and central aggregation we hope to achieve high 
accuracy, strong generalization across a large variety of 
agricultural conditions, and minimize communication and 
training costs. In addition to the technical efficiency, 
addressing the reluctance to share operational data by farmers 
is offered in a secure solution that will allow earlier prediction 
and intervention of the disease. Placed in the context of the 
increasing interest in data-driven agriculture, the work points 
to the potential offered by federated learning as the middle 
ground in terms of innovation and data security that can be 
used to facilitate more resilient and efficient practices on 
farms in the future. 
Ghabi, M et al., (2025) in [7] proposes a federated learning 
framework coupled with a modular microservices-based 
architecture so as to provide predictive models in the form of 
machine learning services. To achieve scalable and resilient 
real-time predictions, its architecture is a set of microservices 
that manage data and train a local model, aggregate data using 
federated learning, and deliver using APIs. A case analysis of 
the soil type classification use of the framework illustrates the 
efficacy of the framework as it yields better recommendation 
of agriculture alongside data confidentiality in distributed 
sources. The contribution of the work to the field of AI 
applicability in agriculture is to offer a secure, scalable, and 
adaptive AI solution to complex environments that need to be 
efficient and privacy-preserving by integrating federated 
learning and microservice architecture together. 
The work of Li et al., (2025) in [8] introduced the VLLFL 
framework to incorporate the vision-language model (VLM) 
in lightweight federated learning as a competent and privacy-
friendly work on agricultural tasks. Using a compact prompt 
generator, the framework improves the generation and 
contextual 
detection 
abilities 
of 
VLMs 
under 
the 
methodological 
constraints 
of 
significantly 
lower 
communication overhead during federated training. The 
experimental results point out to a 14.53 percent increase in 
VLM performance with a 99.3 per cent decrease in 
communication costs. VLLFL is efficient, usable, and scalable 
and shows the potential to become a methodology of 
developing intelligent and secure smart farming systems, 
concerning the fruit identification and the harmful animal 
detection tasks. 
III. PROPOSED WORK 
The proposed study presents a Federated Learning (FL) 
framework 
that 
is 
suitable 
to 
floating-point-aware 
computations in scalable smart agriculture applications [9]. 
This architecture combines the diverse IoT devices (e.g., soil 
sensors, weather stations, 
drones, autonomous farm 
machinery) with edge servers and cloud-based orchestration 
units and connects those with the highly-reliable, low-latency 
communications backbone of 6G networks. The model given 
in Figure 1 is structured in a such a way that learning is 
enabled to be distributed, data is kept private, bandwith usage 
is minimized, and the solution is scalable to allow deployment 
in large-scale heterogeneous agricultural settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Smart Agriculture model 
6G 
Federated 
Learning  
IoT 
Sensors 
Drones 
Autonomous 
Machinery 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Sustainable Communication Networks and Application (ICSCN-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25DW8-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-9420-6
979-8-3315-9420-6/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
319
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 15:54:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
A. Layer Architecture of proposed work 
The federated architecture is proposed with five layers for 
smart farming: 
1) IoT Data Acquisition Layer 
Consists of intelligent sensors and unmanned aerial 
vehicles that gather information about the moisture of the soil, 
the number of nutrients, the state of crops and changes in the 
environment. Raw data is dizained to remain localized to 
maintain privacy and limit communication costs. Acquire raw 
agricultural data relating to soil health and crop growth 
patterns and weather parameters and pest movements. Work 
in non-homogeneous environments, i.e. there are device 
differences in terms of computational power, energy 
availability, and communications [10]. 
2) Edge Computing and Preprocessing Layer 
Initial data filtering, normalization and feature extraction 
is performed by the lightweight edge nodes. This is where the 
localized model training starts and the speedy response to 
timely agricultural decision (e.g.,pest detection, irrigation 
control) is ensured [11]. Do data cleaning (normalization, 
feature extraction cardiovascular). Perform featherweight 
analytics to cover time-sensitive processes such as sensing 
outbreaks of pests or water stress. 
3) Federated Learning Layer 
The IoT/edge device then trains a machine learning model 
on the data it is observing (e.g. a CNN model to classify crops, 
an LSTM model to predict weather-based irrigation policies). 
Raw data is not exchanged, there is only sharing of model 
parameters/weights with the global aggregator. Aggregator 
builds a global model which captures patterns of agriculture 
in a variety of environments as put together by the various 
nodes that contribute updates. 
4) Blockchain-based Security Layer 
Blockchain helps provide integrity and traceability and 
trusted model updates among the nodes. Smart contracts guide 
safe data exchange, access to control and verification of the 
model contribution. 
5) Global Model Deployment Layer 
The aggregated model is propagated back to all the 
participating nodes and as such real time, collaborative 
intelligence across farms is achieved. Such iterative process 
helps to keep on enhancing the prediction accuracy and the 
robustness of insights related to agriculture. Distrusts the 
distilled global model to IoT things and edge nodes. Allows 
farms to make local, real-time, data-driven decisions using the 
current trained model. The model is defined with layered 
architecture explained below in Figure  2: 
B. Data collection 
The data collection was done in 12 farms in three different 
agro-climatic regions and ensured a substantial presentation in 
all kinds of crops, soil, and environmental variation. In three 
cropping seasons, 60,000 agricultural images were obtained 
with a UAV-mounted RGB (40,000 images), multispectral 
(15,000 images), as well as thermal (5,000 images) camera, 
with backup coverage by fixed ground cameras and Internet 
of Things sensors as time-lapse data. The dataset was duly 
balanced on various growth stages (seedling, vegetative, 
flowering and maturity) and labeled into categories like 
healthy crops, nutrient deficiency, pest infestation, disease 
occurrence, water stress and presence of weeds. A rich feature 
set, including multiple vegetation indices (NDVI, NDRE, 
GNDVI, ExG), spectral statistics of multispectral bands and 
thermal gradients to predict water stress, followed by color 
descriptors (L*a*b*) and texture descriptors based on GLCM 
and LBP to detect variations in leaf lesion and canopy were 
attached to each of the images [12]. Besides, morphological 
characteristics such as canopy cover and symptomatic patch 
area and row structure deviation were also extracted as 
morphological variations within crop fields. To add contextual 
meaning, every picture was synchronized in time with 
readings of soil sensors (moisture, temperature, pH, NPK 
levels) and weather stations (temperature, humidity, rainfall, 
solar radiation), and management metadata, including sowing 
dates and irrigation schedules. This large multi-modal dataset, 
which includes visual, spectral, thermal and contextual 
features, served to not only allow the appropriate training of 
machine learning models, but also expressed the non-IID 
distribution across farms, making it suitable to test the 
federated learning framework in 6G-enabled smart agriculture. 
 
Fig. 2. System Architecture of Proposed work 
1) Feature Extraction 
The images captured by the UAVs and the IoT devices 
have been processed to obtain the features of the spectral, 
color, texture, morphological generated as well as the features 
of the context. These characteristics are essential to crop 
health detection, identifying any stressful conditions, and 
predictive analytics in the 6G enabled federated learning 
platform. 
2) Spectral & Vegetation Indices 
Multispectral and RGB bands were transformed into 
vegetation indices providing the measures of the chlorophyll 
activity, density of the canopy, and stress.  
Proceedings of the International Conference on Sustainable Communication Networks and Application (ICSCN-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25DW8-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-9420-6
979-8-3315-9420-6/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
320
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 15:54:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI): NDVI 
is one of the most common studies of spectral variables in 
remote sensing and precision agriculture. It is aimed at 
measuring 
vegetation 
greenness 
and 
photosynthetic 
performances, which are closely related to the plant health 
[13-14]. Vegetation with higher NDVI is a healthy, 
photosynthetically active one. 
 
NDVI =
NIR−R
NIR+R  
 
 
 
(1) 
NIR is the near-infrared reflectance 
R is the red reflectance 
Normalized Difference Red Edge Index (NDRE): NDRE 
is also responsive to variations in chlorophyll at later growth 
periods. 
 
NDRE =
NIR−RE
NIR+RE   
 
 
(2) 
Red edge band is RE, later chlorophyll sensitive NDRE at 
later growth stages. 
Green Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (GNDVI): 
A convenient choice to monitor water or nitrogen stress. 
 
 
GNDVI =
NIR−G
NIR+G   
 
(3) 
G is green reflectance. 
Excess Green Index (ExG): 
ExG images enhance crops more and weeds and soil less.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ExG = 2G −R −B  
 
 
(4) 
where R, G, B are red, green, and blue reflectance. 
Federated setup & client configuration 
Let farms (or MEC sites) be the client set k = {1, … . k}. 
Client k holds dataset Dk = {(xi, yi) for i=1.  
In bandwidth allocation, bk denotes the bandwidth 
assigned to client k with bk ≤Btot and achievable rate rk =
ɳk(bk) (modulation/coding & SINR folded rk = ɳk(bk) 
3) Model Selection 
Given an input image x ∈RH X W X C (RGB or fused with 
crop-condition index such as NDVI, NDRE, etc., C ≥3), 
predict a crop-condition class y ∈(1,2, … . Ccls}. . This 
network runs 
p(y = c|x; ɵ) = softmaxc o(x; ɵ)   
 
(5) 
 
 
c = 1, … . Ccls 
o(x; ɵ) ∈Rc  are logits and ɵ are trainable parameters. 
Backbone: Efficient Edge CNN 
In an accuracy-latency tradeoff at the edge, we use a 
MobileNet/ EfficientNet-lite-style backbone with depth wise-
separable convolutions and Squeeze-and-Excitation (SE). 
Algorithm 1: CNN-Based Crop Condition Classification 
The algorithm is edge-deployable, allows multimodal 
fusion and can be applied to a federated learning setting where 
each client locally trains and aggregation is conducted. 
Step1: Let consider input image 
Image x ∈RH X W XC in RGB/multispectral, thermal 
Contextual 
features 
u ∈Rd
 (soil, 
weather 
and 
management) 
Ground truth label y ∈{1,2, … . Ccls} 
Step 2: Preprocess the input image  
calculate vegetation indices (NDVI, NDRE, ExG) and add 
as extra channels. Denoise channels in the image: 
 
x′ =
x−μ
σ    
 
 
 
(6) 
Step 3: Feature Extraction 
Apply depth wise–separable convolutions: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
zh,w,i
′
= Wu,v,i
dw xh+u
′
,w+v ,i  
 
 
(7) 
Apply point wise convolution,  
 
 
 
zh,w,k = Wi,k
pwzh,w,i
′
 
 
 
(8) 
Apply Squeeze-and-Excitation (SE) block:  
a′ = s. a  
 
 
 
 
(9) 
s = σW2δ(W1GAP(a)) 
 
 
(10)
 
Step 4: Global representation 
Global average a pooling of feature map to attain feature 
vector f ∈RD and Process context features u′ = MLP(u) 
Step 5: Handle Loss function 
The loss can be addressed with the help of the cross-
entropy calculation 
LcCE = −∑
wcyc log pc
Ccls
c=1
  
 
 
(11) 
Step 6: Optimization 
The features are refined through updating logits trainable 
parameter with local training 
 
ɵ ←ɵ −ɳ∇ɵL 
 
 
 
(12) 
Step 7: Classification 
For classification  
y′ = argmaxcp(y = c|x)  
 
 
(13)
 
 
C. Federated learning loop 
Federated learning (FL) is a decentralised machine 
learning approach in which several clients (e.g. mobile phones, 
IoT devices, or in this case farms) cooperate to train a shared 
model under the guidance of a central coordinator without 
sharing sensitive raw data. 
Algorithm 2: Federated Learning for Smart farming 
Step 1: Initialization  
Proceedings of the International Conference on Sustainable Communication Networks and Application (ICSCN-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25DW8-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-9420-6
979-8-3315-9420-6/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
321
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 15:54:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Start with a global CNN model w(0) 
Step 2: Client selection 
At time t, draw a random sample of farm/clients St ⊆K 
Selection takes into consideration data size, rarity of 
classes, staleness, as well as 6G bandwidth/latency budgets 
Step 3: Broadcast 
Transfer the existing global model used on w(t−1)  to the 
selected clients 
Step 4: Local training  
Each client trains locally for E  epochs on the client's 
private data Dk 
wk
(t) = arg min
w
Fk(w) +
μ
2 ||w −w(t−1)||
2
  
(14) 
Fk(w) is local loss and μ is a FedProx term for non-IID 
data. 
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
The performances of the proposed 6G-based Federated 
Learning (FL) solution to smart agriculture (including edge-
only CNN models and a centralized model (upper bound) 
were compared. The results in Figure 3 demonstrate that 
fedAvg and FedProx federalized training method has a 
significant impact on improved performance of classification 
as well as maintaining data privacy. Concretely, FedProx 
performs better than the baselines with a Macro-F1 of 0.86 
compared to 0.74 of the edge-only version and 0.87 of the 
centralized model. AUROC and balanced accuracy indicators 
are in the same pattern, showing good discriminative capacity 
regardless of crop health status. 
 
Fig. 3. F1 analysis 
A. Learning Curve 
The learning curves in Figure 4 emphasize that FedProx 
can converge with a higher speed and higher accuracy 
compared to FedAvg, whereas edge-only models are not able 
to reach higher performance. Significantly, federated models 
improve consistency per client by a Macro-F1 of +0.07 to 
+0.13 on 12 farms, indicating that federated models are fair 
even when not in an identical data distribution. It shows that 
even those farms whose datasets are smaller or skewed toward 
a single label continue to see major benefits by training 
collaboratively. 
B. Confusion Matrix 
A confusion matrix analysis in Figure 5 indicates good 
results on all the conditions of the crop, where results 
exceeded 80% recall on each of the classes. An accuracy of 
the highest rank is obtained on healthy crops at 92 percent, 
whereas there is moderate confusion between nutrient 
deficiency and water stress, a phenomenon caused by similar 
spectral signatures. Besides, calibration analysis reveals that 
federated models can minimize Expected Calibration Error 
(ECE) on edge-only and 0.05 and even to as low as 0.02 with 
temperature scaling. This makes the predicted probabilities 
acceptable, a must in making the appropriate decisions in 
irrigation scheduling, disease alerts, and yield forecasting 
decisions. 
 
Fig. 4. Analysis on Learning curve 
 
Fig. 5. Confusion Matrix 
Compared with efficiency, federated training only needs 
~2.2 MB of communication per client per round and can be 
reduced to half (1.1 MB) with compression and differential 
privacy incurring little accuracy degradation. The inference 
latency (~55 ms) and model size (~6 MB) are also reasonable 
to deploy such a model on the resource-limited farm devices. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Sustainable Communication Networks and Application (ICSCN-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25DW8-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-9420-6
979-8-3315-9420-6/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
322
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 15:54:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
