remote sensing 
Review
Challenges and Future Perspectives of
Multi-/Hyperspectral Thermal Infrared Remote
Sensing for Crop Water-Stress Detection: A Review
Max Gerhards 1,2,*
, Martin Schlerf 2, Kaniska Mallick 2
and Thomas Udelhoven 1
1
University of Trier, Faculty of Geography and Geosciences, Department of Environmental Remote Sensing &
Geoinformatics, Behringstrasse, D-54296 Trier, Germany; udelhoven@uni-trier.de
2
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST), Environmental Research and Innovation (ERIN)
Department, 41 Rue du Brill, L-4422 Belvaux, Luxembourg; martin.schlerf@list.lu (M.S.);
kaniska.mallick@list.lu (K.M.)
*
Correspondence: gerhardsm@uni-trier.de or max.gerhards@yahoo.de
Received: 16 April 2019; Accepted: 17 May 2019; Published: 24 May 2019


Abstract: Thermal infrared (TIR) multi-/hyperspectral and sun-induced ﬂuorescence (SIF) approaches
together with classic solar-reﬂective (visible, near-, and shortwave infrared reﬂectance (VNIR)/SWIR)
hyperspectral remote sensing form the latest state-of-the-art techniques for the detection of crop
water stress. Each of these three domains requires dedicated sensor technology currently in place
for ground and airborne applications and either have satellite concepts under development (e.g.,
HySPIRI/SBG (Surface Biology and Geology), Sentinel-8, HiTeSEM in the TIR) or are subject to
satellite missions recently launched or scheduled within the next years (i.e., EnMAP and PRISMA
(PRecursore IperSpettrale della Missione Applicativa, launched on March 2019) in the VNIR/SWIR,
Fluorescence Explorer (FLEX) in the SIF). Identiﬁcation of plant water stress or drought is of utmost
importance to guarantee global water and food supply. Therefore, knowledge of crop water status
over large farmland areas bears large potential for optimizing agricultural water use. As plant
responses to water stress are numerous and complex, their physiological consequences aﬀect the
electromagnetic signal in diﬀerent spectral domains. This review paper summarizes the importance of
water stress-related applications and the plant responses to water stress, followed by a concise review
of water-stress detection through remote sensing, focusing on TIR without neglecting the comparison
to other spectral domains (i.e., VNIR/SWIR and SIF) and multi-sensor approaches. Current and
planned sensors at ground, airborne, and satellite level for the TIR as well as a selection of commonly
used indices and approaches for water-stress detection using the main multi-/hyperspectral remote
sensing imaging techniques are reviewed. Several important challenges are discussed that occur
when using spectral emissivity, temperature-based indices, and physically-based approaches for
water-stress detection in the TIR spectral domain. Furthermore, challenges with data processing
and the perspectives for future satellite missions in the TIR are critically examined. In conclusion,
information from multi-/hyperspectral TIR together with those from VNIR/SWIR and SIF sensors
within a multi-sensor approach can provide profound insights to actual plant (water) status and the
rationale of physiological and biochemical changes. Synergistic sensor use will open new avenues
for scientists to study plant functioning and the response to environmental stress in a wide range
of ecosystems.
Keywords: remote sensing; thermal infrared (TIR); water stress; crop stress; evapotranspiration (ET)
modeling; emissivity; temperature; drought; water use
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 1240; doi:10.3390/rs11101240
www.mdpi.com/journal/remotesensing
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 1240
2 of 24
1. Importance of Water-Stress Detection
Water-deﬁcit stress, usually shortened to water or drought stress, describes the plant physiological
responses induced by a lack of available water due to either soil water deﬁcit or high evaporative
demand of the atmosphere. Water stress induces dehydration in the plant and prevents plant cells
from keeping water concentrations at an acceptable and healthy level [1,2]. Therefore, water stress is
one of the most critical abiotic stressors limiting plant growth, crop yield and quality concerning food
production [3,4].
Since the global population is projected to grow by about 2.3 billion people between 2015 and 2050
and societies are changing from low to medium per capita income, global food demand is expected
to double within the same time [5–7]. Therefore, one of the most challenging tasks of our generation
is to meet the second Sustainable Development Goal as deﬁned in the 2030 agenda for sustainable
development by the United Nations: “End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and
promote sustainable agriculture” [8]. In this respect, agricultural processes need to be optimized and
innovative farming methods must be developed to guarantee global food supply, as arable land and
environmental resources have almost reached the limits of sustainability.
Water is the most valuable resource of our planet. Presently, agriculture consumes 80–90% of the
freshwater used by humans worldwide and about two thirds of this freshwater is required for crop
irrigation [9]. Therefore, the ultimate goal must be a reduction in the amount of water used per unit
yield [10].
In addition, anthropogenic climate change is predicted to cause an increase of 1.0–2.5 ◦C in the
annual mean global temperature over the next 50 years with a tremendous impact on agriculture [11].
Consequently, evapotranspiration (ET) rates will increase and thus, the demand of water for crop
irrigation will further rise. At the same time, extreme weather events such as droughts will appear
more frequently and be more severe. These facts add some extra pressure to increasing global water
scarcity and the need for saving water.
Hence, it is desired to reduce the amount of water used per unit yield by reducing yield loss
and by reducing the amount of water used for irrigation. To achieve this goal, early detection and
monitoring of plant responses to water stress in agricultural crops are mandatory. Remote sensing
oﬀers the opportunity to acquire high spatial, spectral and temporal resolution data as input for
precision agriculture [12]. Precision agriculture promises great potential to close the yield gap by
optimizing food production using the right management practice at the right place and the right time
while keeping the consumption of resources at an environmentally sustainable level [13].
2. Plant Responses to Water Stress
Plant responses to water stress are numerous and complex (see [4,14–16] for comprehensive
reviews). They appear synergistically or antagonistically and are modiﬁed by co-occurring plant
stresses under ﬁeld conditions (Figure 1) [4,17,18].
Therefore, it remains diﬃcult to detect and
monitor plant water deﬁcit based on a single plant response [19]. In general, water deﬁcit causes
physiological and biochemical changes which induce a reduction in photosynthesis and thus plant
growth [16]. However, the timing, intensity, and duration of water stress are crucial to determine the
plant physiological responses and their impact on plant metabolism [20]. For example, under mild
water-stress conditions, plant regulation of water loss and uptake still allows the plant to maintain
relative leaf water content with no or only little change in photosynthetic capacity. In contrast, severe
water deﬁcit induces serious physiological and biochemical changes, which lead to eﬀects ranging
from inhibition of photosynthesis and growth to leaf wilting and the loss of key pigments such as
chlorophyll and thus to irreversible damages to the photosynthetic machinery [15–17]. Hence, plants
have developed multiple mechanisms to prevent severe damage through water stress [21].
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 1240
3 of 24
Figure 1. Most important relationships between primary plant stresses, the induced plant responses,
and the multi-/hyperspectral remote sensing techniques for the detection of environmental stresses
(modiﬁed after Jones and Vaughan [19]).
The ﬁrst plant response to water stress is stomatal closure, which prevents transpirational water
loss (e.g., [4,15,17]). In particular, stomatal closure is the response to either a deﬁcit in soil water
supply or to low-humidity atmosphere with high evaporative demand. It is commonly assumed that
stomatal response is rather linked to soil water content than to leaf water content. This suggests that
stomata are most likely triggered by chemical signals, such as the accumulation of abscisic acid (ABA)
in dehydrated roots rather than by a reduced cell turgor [4]. However, under severe and/or prolonged
water stress, cell turgor, and leaf water content is also reduced [15]. As a consequence, the exchange of
water vapor between plants and atmosphere is reduced by stomatal closure and thus, the evaporative
cooling eﬀect is decreased resulting in an overall increase of plant surface temperature compared to a
plant which does not suﬀer from water stress [14,18,22].
However, the stomata not only control plant transpiration but also plant respiration which inhibits
CO2 uptake and ﬁxation. As a result of stomatal closure, the photosynthetic rate is reduced, which
causes a reduction in cell division and thus slows down leaf growth and reduces the rate of leaf
surface area expansion. A persistent water deﬁcit will further damage the photosynthetic machinery
through loss of chlorophyll, which ﬁnally introduces changes in leaf color and wilting [15,16,20].
Another plant response to water stress is the change in sun-induced ﬂuorescence (SIF). While the
photosynthetic rate is reduced by a decreased CO2 uptake due to stomatal closure, irradiance and
absorbed photosynthetically active radiation (fAPAR) remain constant. In general, energy absorbed by
plant pigments (i.e., the chlorophylls and carotenoids) is dissipated by three competitive processes (i.e.,
photosynthesis, SIF, and heat emission). Consequently, a reduced photochemistry as induced by water
stress results in several physiological mechanisms to protect the plant against photoinhibition. These
mechanisms foster non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) and reduce SIF [23,24].
Besides these plant responses to water stress, osmotic adjustment is a further strategy to prevent
irreversible damage. Osmotic adjustment describes the process of the accumulation of solutes such as
carbohydrates and proteins to maintain the cell turgor at osmotic equilibrium [25].
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 1240
4 of 24
In summary, plant responses to water stress can be recognized as a sequence of physiological
and biochemical changes depending on the severity and duration of plant water deﬁcit. Hence, the
detection of water-stress symptoms is a function of time and depends on the plant responses to water
deﬁcit and their corresponding physiological changes, which may be sensitive to diﬀerent remote
sensing techniques.
3. Remote Sensing of Water Stress
Remote sensing is one of the key technologies in precision agriculture, which has an enormous
demand for geospatial information [12,13]. Besides the information needs for soil properties, crop
nutrients, crop biomass, and diseases, farmers and decision makers have a major interest in the
detection of plant responses to environmental and water stresses [26–30]. In general, remote sensing
provides a fast, cost-eﬃcient, non-destructive, and spatio-temporal measure of numerous physiological,
biochemical and structural crop characteristics at diﬀerent scales (ground, airborne, and satellite).
Plants can be irreversibly aﬀected before visible symptoms of water stress appear [15–17]. Therefore, a
pre-symptomatic or pre-visual detection of plant physiological changes can essentially contribute to
avoiding severe crop damages [31]. Hyperspectral imagery, with its continuous spectral data, has the
potential to provide further insights into the relationship between the spectral features and associated
plant conditions [32]. Focusing on the detection of plant responses to environmental stresses, the main
multi-/hyperspectral remote sensing techniques are thermal imaging (TIR; 8–14 µm), visible, near- and
shortwave infrared reﬂectance (VNIR/SWIR; 0.4–2.5 µm), and sun-induced ﬂuorescence (SIF 0.685 and
0.74 µm).
3.1. Thermal Infrared Domain
Since the 1970s TIR remote sensing (8–14 µm) has been recognized as a potential tool for early
plant water-stress detection. In general, emitted radiance in the TIR contains two intrinsic kinds of
information: (i) surface temperature (i.e., “directional radiometric surface temperature” as deﬁned
by [33]) of the object of interest and (ii) its spectral emissivity.
3.1.1. Temperature and Emissivity Separation (TES)
To derive both accurate surfaces temperatures and emissivity spectra, from hyperspectral TIR
data, two fundamental problems have to be solved (e.g., [34–36]). First, atmospheric correction is
needed, hence, the spectral radiance measured at sensor consists not only of the radiance emitted by the
object of interest itself but also includes thermal radiation emitted by surroundings and reﬂected from
the surface of the object (down-welling radiance (DWR)). It is further inﬂuenced by the intervening
atmosphere in terms of absorption, emission, and scattering (upwelling radiance and transmittance
(τ) of the atmosphere). In the past, upwelling path and τ were mostly neglected for short distance
ﬁeld measurements. However, it has been shown by MIDAC (Model M4401-F; MIDAC Corporation,
CA, USA) measurements over agricultural site’s in Barrax (Spain) that atmospheric correction is
required (and possible) for such short distance measurements [37]. For airborne or satellite imagery
the correction of atmospheric distortions is essential. Second, a solution to the so-called TES-problem
is required. The measured spectral radiance is, regarding Planck’s law, a function of the absolute
temperature and the spectral emissivity of the observed object. Thus, if the radiance is measured in n
bands, there will be n + 1 unknowns, n emissivities values, plus the surface temperature. Therefore, to
retrieve accurate surface temperatures, the spectral emissivity must be known and vice versa.
While in theory, the TES represents an ill-posed problem, hyperspectral data in comparison
to multispectral data allows a good ﬁt to Planck’s radiance curve for a speciﬁc temperature [38].
Presently, a variety of algorithms exist which diﬀer in the underlying assumptions and the data
basis.
A comprehensive review is given by Li et al. [39].
In general, it must be distinguished
between short (indoor and outdoor measurement with 1–3 m) and large (ﬁeld or air- and spaceborne
measurements) sensor–target distances. For short distance ﬁeld measurements, the new approach
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 1240
5 of 24
by Timmermans et al. [37] oﬀers an auto-correction for atmospheric eﬀects in TIR by: (i) calculating
transmissivity from hot and cold blackbody measurements, (ii) using a simple atmospheric radiative
transfer model based on MODTRAN for the retrieval of the atmospheric gas-constituents (i.e., H2O
and CO2). Besides, the Spectral Smoothness method introduced by Horton et al. [40] is a widely used
and accurate TES-approach for short distance ﬁeld measurements. This is because the smoothness
approach requires no a priori knowledge, neither the maximum value of the emissivity nor the
corresponding wavenumber. The atmospheric emission lines (i.e., H2O) are negatively oriented if
the sample temperature is overestimated and vice versa. Using this atmospheric characteristic, the
target emissivity spectrum can be accurately retrieved by iteratively changing the target temperature.
However, this approach is only suitable for outside measurements in the presence of atmospheric
water vapor lines. Because atmospheric features are not present or much lower in closed rooms, the
Reference Channel or the Blackbody Fit should be used alternatively for indoor measurements [41].
Concerning measurements from a greater distance (ﬁeld, airborne or satellite), atmospheric upwelling
path and τ cannot be neglected. The Automatic Retrieval of Temperature and Emissivity using Spectral
Smoothness (ARTEMISS) by Borel [42] is a hybrid approach, combining atmospheric correction and
TES. First, the required atmospheric parameters (DWR, upwelling radiance, τ) are determined using a
MODTRAN (MODerate resolution atmospheric TRANsmission) look-up-table (LUT). To this end, a
pre-selection of potential atmospheric parameters is completed by using the In-Scene Atmospheric
Compensation (ISAC) approach by Young et al. [43]. Finally, spectral emissivity is retrieved using a
spectral smoothness approach called ISSTES (Iterative Spectrally Smooth Temperature and Emissivity
Separation, [44]). In comparison to other in-scene atmospheric correction approaches, such as ISAC
or AAC (Autonomous Atmospheric Compensation, [45]), ARTEMISS does not require any a priori
knowledge and considers DWR. Therefore, ARTEMISS can be considered the state-of-the-art algorithm
for hyperspectral TIR airborne data.
3.1.2. Temperature-Based Approach
Measuring leaf or canopy temperature for the detection of plant responses to water-deﬁcit stress
is based on the idea of Tanner [46]. It is well established from the leaf energy balance equation that leaf
temperature varies with (evapo-) transpiration rates of the leaves and hence is a function of stomatal
conductance [46–48]. The transpiration rate is inversely correlated with leaf temperature [49]. The
underlying principle is that if plant water status decreases, leaf transpiration is reduced as a result
of active regulation of stomatal aperture [31]. Consequently, the inhibited evaporative cooling eﬀect
leads to higher leaf and canopy temperatures in comparison to a well-watered plant (see Section 2
of this review). Normally, the leaf temperature of a fully transpiring plant is about 2–5 K below the
ambient air temperature [50]. Thus, leaf or canopy temperature depends substantially on the stomatal
conductance [22]. Accordingly, as stomatal closure is the initial plant response to water deﬁcit, TIR
remote sensing of leaf and/or canopy temperature has become an established technique to detect
pre-visual water stress (e.g., [22,51–55]).
The major limitation of the temperature-based approach is that the use of leaf or canopy temperature
values alone cannot directly estimate the physiological status of crop plants [49]. This is because
leaf temperatures measured under natural ﬁeld conditions are very sensitive to highly ﬂuctuating
environmental factors such as air temperature, humidity, vapor pressure deﬁcit (VPD), wind speed,
and incident radiation. Therefore, a variety of crop water-stress index approaches have been developed
in the past with the aim of estimating plant water stress more quantitatively by normalizing radiatively
measured leaf temperatures to actual environmental conditions. Following, a concise overview of
the most important approaches of TIR sensing for water-stress detection is given (see [22,51,55] for
comprehensive reviews).
