A review of advanced machine learning methods
for the detection of biotic stress in precision crop
protection
Jan Behmann • Anne-Katrin Mahlein • Till Rumpf • Christoph Ro¨mer •
Lutz Plu¨mer
Published online: 31 August 2014
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
Abstract
Effective crop protection requires early and accurate detection of biotic stress.
In recent years, remarkable results have been achieved in the early detection of weeds,
plant diseases and insect pests in crops. These achievements are related both to the
development of non-invasive, high resolution optical sensors and data analysis methods
that are able to cope with the resolution, size and complexity of the signals from these
sensors. Several methods of machine learning have been utilized for precision agriculture
such as support vector machines and neural networks for classiﬁcation (supervised
learning); k-means and self-organizing maps for clustering (unsupervised learning). These
methods are able to calculate both linear and non-linear models, require few statistical
assumptions and adapt ﬂexibly to a wide range of data characteristics. Successful appli-
cations include the early detection of plant diseases based on spectral features and weed
detection based on shape descriptors with supervised or unsupervised learning methods.
This review gives a short introduction into machine learning, analyses its potential for
precision crop protection and provides an overview of instructive examples from different
ﬁelds of precision agriculture.
Keywords
Machine learning  Stress detection  Optical sensors  Data analysis  Plant
diseases  Weed detection
Jan Behmann and Anne-Katrin Mahlein have contributed equally to this work.
J. Behmann (&)  T. Rumpf  C. Ro¨mer  L. Plu¨mer
Institute of Geodesy and Geoinformation (IGG) - Geoinformation, University of Bonn, Meckenheimer
Allee 172, 53115 Bonn, Germany
e-mail: behmann@igg.uni-bonn.de
URL: http://www.ikg.uni-bonn.de/mitarbeiter/behmann.html
A.-K. Mahlein
Institute of Crop Science and Resource Conservation (INRES) - Phytomedicine, University of Bonn,
Nussallee 9, 53115 Bonn, Germany
123
Precision Agric (2015) 16:239–260
DOI 10.1007/s11119-014-9372-7
Abbreviations
FAO
Food and agriculture organization of the United Nations
EPPO
European and Mediterranean plant protection organization
SVM
Support vector machine
SVR
Support vector regression
Rbf
Radial basis function kernel
NN
Neural networks
SOM
Self-organizing maps
VI
Vegetation index
NDVI
Normalized difference vegetation index
PCA
Principal component analysis
PCs
Principal components
LDA
Linear discriminant analysis
QDA
Quadratic discriminant analysis
PLS
Partial least squares
NIR
Near infrared
RGB
Red, green and blue color image
LAB
LAB-color space: lightness (L), a and b for color-component dimensions
YCBCR
YCBCR-color space: luminance (Y), blue-yellow chrominance (CB), red-green
chrominance (CR)
HSV
HSV-color space: hue, saturation, value
Introduction
Precision agriculture and precision crop protection
‘‘Sustainable intensiﬁcation’’—producing more food from the same area of land while at
the same time reducing the environmental impacts—demands innovative agronomic
practices (FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 2011). Precision
agriculture strategies (the integration of different modern technologies like sensors,
information and management systems) can reduce the ecological and economic impacts in
agricultural crop production (Gebbers & Adamchuk 2010). According to Oerke & Dehne
(2004), 40 % of the world food production is lost through weeds, diseases and insects. The
occurrence of weed and disease infestation depends on speciﬁc environmental factors and
exhibits a patchy distribution in the ﬁeld (Franke et al. 2009). Thus the early identiﬁcation
of primary weed and disease foci as well as locating areas differing in weed or disease
severity in the ﬁeld is of high relevance (Moshou et al. 2004). Weed and pest monitoring in
addition to the decision making-process are fundamental for site-speciﬁc management
(Hillnhu¨tter & Mahlein 2008). Such site-speciﬁc crop management requires a high density
of spatial and temporal information.
Weeds compete with crop plants for environmental resources (such as light, water,
nutrients and space) and serve as hosts for diseases and pests (Fig. 1) (Patterson 1995).
Plant pathogen interactions along with the resulting disease symptoms are inﬂuenced by
various external factors. Most biotic stress factors (like weeds and plant pathogens) as well
as abiotic stress factors (such as water or nutrient deﬁciency, heat, chill or frost) reduce the
yield of crops by affecting the photosynthetic apparatus (Stafford 2000), which in turn has
an effect on the optical properties of plants. The observation of plants using non-invasive
240
Precision Agric (2015) 16:239–260
123
sensors during their growth period provides new insights into the reactions of living plants
to biotic stresses.
Sensor systems and challenges in data interpretation
Sensor systems, such as multi-spectral, hyperspectral and chlorophyll ﬂuorescence, can
provide high resolution data concerning agricultural crop stands (Berdugo et al. 2014;
Mahlein et al. 2012a; Mahlein et al. 2013). Progress in sensor technology along with
advances in computer science and geographic information systems offers new opportu-
nities for precision agriculture, and constitutes the basis for early detection and identi-
ﬁcation of weeds and plant diseases (Chaerle et al. 2004; Lee et al. 2010; Moshou et al.
2004; Rumpf et al. 2010). The quality and quantity of data that are made available from
plant sensors has dramatically increased. These sensors are highly sensitive to biological
changes. However, they do not measure plant physiological parameters directly, but
record a spectrum that is a sum of reﬂectance contributions attributed to various plant
characteristics and the measurement conditions (e.g. leaf inclination, illumination and
surface texture) (Jensen 2007; Gitelson et al. 2002). These observations that have high
spectral, spatial and temporal resolution require the use of advanced methods of data
analysis.
Traditional methods for data analysis, such as linear regression and linear discriminant
analysis, are based on predeﬁned distributions and model assumptions. These methods
are applicable without loss in accuracy only for data that complies with these demands,
e.g. Fisher’s linear discriminant requires that the classes can be separated linearly and
that each of the two classes can be represented by a unimodal Gaussian distribution
(Bishop 2006). Therefore, the ﬁeld of application is limited for these kinds of analysis
methods.
Advanced methods of machine learning, such as k-means, support vector machines
(SVMs) and neural networks (NNs) (Fig. 2), require less prior information and are
applicable to a wider range of tasks as they derive the underlying distributions and model
assumptions implicitly from training data (Mitchell 1997). This capacity to adapt to almost
any kind of data makes them well suited for tasks with limited prior knowledge about a
suitable interpretation model or complex data characteristics like non-linearity, non-
Gaussian noise and outliers. These methods are particularly suitable for the interpretation
of data from optical sensors because the included noise factors may be compensated by a
sufﬁcient amount of representative training data (Breiman 2001b). The resulting models
are able to reduce the inﬂuence of the unknown variability signiﬁcantly and provide more
reliable decisions.
Fig. 1 Crop stand of Hordeum vulgare and the weed Galium aparine. Accurate detection of Galium
aparine is highly relevant and challenging due to a low economic threshold and high similarity to other
weeds
Precision Agric (2015) 16:239–260
241
123
A scenario with ﬁctitious measurement values is presented in Fig. 3 and illustrates the
capabilities of machine learning methods. In this scenario, a regression model of the
relation between the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) and the severity of a
disease is required. Under the assumption of limited visualization possibilities, as in real
world applications, the noise distribution, the required complexity of the regression
function and the number of outliers is unknown. In this scenario, the traditional method of
polynomial regression is compared with a support vector regression (SVR). Figure 3
clariﬁes that the SVR is superior to the polynomial regression because it follows the true
trend by a ﬂexible function and is not inﬂuenced by outliers. The polynomial is not ﬂexible
enough at low orders and, at higher orders, the function starts to oscillate. Moreover, the
underlying least-squares optimization is very susceptible to outliers.
Methods from the ﬁeld of machine learning have been successfully applied in numerous
disciplines, e.g. speech recognition (Waibel et al. 1989; Baker et al. 2009) and land cover
classiﬁcation in remote sensing (Friedl et al. 1999; Waske et al. 2010). In recent years, the
precision crop protection community has started to beneﬁt from the capabilities of machine
learning (Karimi et al. 2006; Mucherino et al. 2009; Ahmed et al. 2012). Therefore ﬂexible
machine learning methods can help to gain new insights—and ﬁnd new relationships
within data for the detection of biotic and abiotic stress. This article gives an overview on
common methods and reviews their applications for the detection of weeds, diseases and
insects.
Machine learning for data analysis
Properties of machine learning methods
The basic assumption regarding machine learning is that computers are able to detect and
quantify patterns in data by using speciﬁc algorithms (Witten and Frank 2005). This
enables the machine to beneﬁt from new information automatically—meaning the program
improves by automated learning (Mitchell 1997). This allows the detection of patterns and
extraction of important information from raw data even if the underlying data model is
unknown (Buxton 2003; Breiman 2001b).
Fig. 2 Basic structures of two common machine learning methods. The linear SVM separates two classes
by a discrimination function which is deﬁned by support vectors (red, broader circles). The characteristics
of a neural network are determined by its node structure. The example given has four input nodes in the
input layer, one hidden layer with three transition nodes and one output node in the output layer (Color
ﬁgure online)
242
Precision Agric (2015) 16:239–260
123
Typically, the data is arranged in a matrix (XijÞ where each row (xi ¼ ½xi1; xi2; . . .; xij) is
a sample composed of j features.1 In many applications, additional target variables (named
‘‘labels’’ yi) are attached to the samples (xiÞ. The algorithm itself derives from these
training data a suitable model (F) by optimizing the model quality by a method-inherent
principle. In the case of SVM classiﬁers, the maximum margin principle is applied (Cortes
and Vapnik 1995) whereas with NNs, a non-convex optimization with regard to prediction
accuracy is generally applied (Suzuki 2011). The aim of the learning process is the gen-
eration of a model that reveals task-relevant patterns without relying on unjustiﬁable
assumptions (Buxton 2003).
There are two basic tasks for machine learning methods (Witten & Frank 2005).
Unsupervised learning starts with unlabeled data and tries to ﬁnd unknown patterns that
enable a new, more compact or more comprehensive representation of the information
contained (Duda et al. 1995). The most prominent example of unsupervised learning is
clustering, whereby the data instances are grouped into different clusters. Normally, the
cluster algorithms compose clusters which comprise samples with similar properties, as
compared to the whole data set.
If target variables named labels yi are given, supervised learning methods are applicable
(Bishop 2006). Here, the identiﬁcation of patterns in the data that are related to the labels
(which allows for the prediction of new, unseen data) is required. A classiﬁcation method
is suitable if discrete label classes (e.g. yes or no) are given, and a regression method is
suitable for continuous label values (Bishop 2006; Witten & Frank 2005).
The supervised learning task is divided into two phases; in phase one, a model (F) is
learned by a speciﬁc machine learning algorithm from labeled training data; in phase two,
it is applied to new, unknown data and predicts the best labels y for the test samples X by
yi ¼ FðxiÞ. In general the model quality is deﬁned by the similarity of actual and predicted
test data labels.
Fig. 3 Support vector regression in a regression scenario involving the NDVI Vegetation Index and the
disease severity, compared to polynomial models of ﬁxed degree and least squares optimization
1 In this article, the following notation is used: matrices are noted as bold upper-case letters in italics,
vectors as bold lower-case letters in italics and scalars as lower-case letters in italics. Models and distri-
butions which can have various representations are noted as bold upper-case letters.
Precision Agric (2015) 16:239–260
243
123
