Vol:.(1234567890)
Precision Agriculture (2024) 25:2614–2642
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-024-10168-3
REVIEW
Crop stress detection from UAVs: best practices and lessons 
learned for exploiting sensor synergies
Erekle Chakhvashvili1   · Miriam Machwitz2 · Michal Antala3 · Offer Rozenstein4 · 
Egor Prikaziuk5 · Martin Schlerf2 · Paul Naethe6 · Quanxing Wan7 · 
Jan Komárek8 · Tomáš Klouek8 · Sebastian Wieneke9 · Bastian Siegmann1,5 · 
Shawn Kefauver10,11 · Marlena Kycko12 · Hamadou Balde13 · Veronica Sobejano Paz14 · 
Jose A. Jimenez‑Berni15 · Henning Buddenbaum16 · Lorenz Hänchen17 · Na Wang18 · 
Amit Weinman4,19 · Anshu Rastogi3 · Nitzan Malachy4 · Maria‑Luisa Buchaillot20 · 
Juliane Bendig1 · Uwe Rascher1
Accepted: 10 July 2024 / Published online: 11 August 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Introduction  Detecting and monitoring crop stress is crucial for ensuring sufficient and 
sustainable crop production. Recent advancements in unoccupied aerial vehicle (UAV) 
technology provide a promising approach to map key crop traits indicative of stress. While 
using single optical sensors mounted on UAVs could be sufficient to monitor crop status in 
a general sense, implementing multiple sensors that cover various spectral optical domains 
allow for a more precise characterization of the interactions between crops and biotic or 
abiotic stressors. Given the novelty of synergistic sensor technology for crop stress detec-
tion, standardized procedures outlining their optimal use are currently lacking.
Materials and methods  This study explores the key aspects of acquiring high-quality 
multi-sensor data, including the importance of mission planning, sensor characteristics, 
and ancillary data. It also details essential data pre-processing steps like atmospheric cor-
rection and highlights best practices for data fusion and quality control.
Results  Successful multi-sensor data acquisition depends on optimal timing, appropriate 
sensor calibration, and the use of ancillary data such as ground control points and weather 
station information. When fusing different sensor data it should be conducted at the level 
of physical units, with quality flags used to exclude unstable or biased measurements. The 
paper highlights the importance of using checklists, considering illumination conditions 
and conducting test flights for the detection of potential pitfalls.
Conclusion  Multi-sensor campaigns require careful planning not to jeopardise the success 
of the campaigns. This paper provides practical information on how to combine different 
UAV-mounted optical sensors and discuss the proven scientific practices for image data 
acquisition and post-processing in the context of crop stress monitoring.
Keywords  UAVs · Optical sensors · Sensor synergy · Crop stress
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
2615
Precision Agriculture (2024) 25:2614–2642	
Introduction
Climate change is expected to increase crop abiotic (heat, drought, etc.) and biotic (pests, 
diseases, etc.) stresses, putting crop productivity at risk (Bevacqua et  al., 2021; Fahad 
et al., 2017). Therefore, detecting and identifying crop stress prior to irreversible damage 
is essential to support management decisions and minimize stress impacts on crop growth 
and yield. While well-planned studies and experiments are essential for detecting and iden-
tifying crop stress, these endeavors are not exempt from technical challenges.
Optical remote sensing (RS) is an established method to detect the impact of differ-
ent stressors on agricultural crops (Berger et al., 2022). Several optical sensors based on 
imaging spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, and thermal imaging have been devel-
oped and are being used in unoccupied aerial vehicles (UAVs), and airborne science cam-
paigns (Adão et al., 2017; Bandopadhyay et al., 2020; Messina & Modica, 2020). Over 
the past decade, combinations of different spectral domains have been used in agriculture 
to estimate plant traits, and productivity (Damm et al., 2022; Weiss et al., 2020). These 
spectral domains include the visible (VIS; 400–700 nm), near-infrared (NIR; 700–1300 
nm), which are also used for sun-induced fluorescence (SIF) retrieval, shortwave infrared 
(SWIR; 1300–2500 nm) and thermal-infrared (TIR; 8–14 µm).
The spectral signature of vegetation in the optical region is primarily determined by the 
plant’s biochemical and structural properties, related to plant vegetative growth and canopy 
development (Jacquemoud, 2000). Consequently, various plant traits are often estimated 
based on empirical relations with different spectral bands (Kaplan and Rozenstein, 2021), 
or they are retrieved with radiative transfer models (RTMs). Another promising approach 
for monitoring vegetation dynamics is to combine RTMs with plant physiological mod-
els (Gastellu-Etchegorry et al., 2015; Pacheco-Labrador et al., 2021; Van der Tol et al., 
2009; Yang et al., 2021). The assimilation of multi-sensor data from complementary spec-
tral domains into crop models has the potential to facilitate decision-making by identifying 
specific stressors and even predicting stress before it occurs (Berger et al., 2022).
While using single optical sensors may suffice to monitor crop status, integrating multi-
sensor data acquired from airborne/UAV platforms is more powerful for understanding 
plant responses to different biotic or abiotic stressors (Aasen et al., 2018; Gerhards et al., 
2019; Mohammed et al., 2019; Panigada et al., 2014). For example, the combination of 
multispectral (MS, discrete spectral bands of a predetermined wavelength range) or hyper-
spectral (HS, continuous spectral coverage across a spectral domain) with TIR sensors pro-
vides broad spectral coverage for detecting and quantifying crop stress at an early stage of 
development. By measuring the leaf or canopy temperature, changes in plant traits such as 
stomatal conductance can be observed in minutes to hours, providing an early (and pre-
visual) indication of the plant responses to stress (Gräf et al., 2021) (Fig. 1). Additionally, 
the incorporation of VIS-NIR information enables the analysis of stress responses related 
to pigment contents, such as chlorophylls, carotenoids (Gitelson & Merzlyak, 1998) and 
anthocyanins (Gitelson et al., 2006) that are critical for photosynthesis and net primary pro-
ductivity. In this context, the combination of different spectral resolutions and sensor types 
may complement the combination of spectral domains for increased spectral coverage.
The synergistic use of sensors from different spectral domains also improves the capac-
ity for the observation of early to long-term crop responses to external stressors that affect 
growth and productivity (Raddi et  al., 2022) (Fig.  1). The integrated use of MS VIS-
NIR together with a broadband SWIR sensor or NIR+SWIR multi-camera array was 
shown as an efficient way to obtain information about crops’ leaf water status or nitrogen 
2616
	
Precision Agriculture (2024) 25:2614–2642
concentration (Jenal et al., 2021; Kandylakis et al., 2020). The VIS-NIR+SWIR synergy is 
particularly useful for medium-term but also long-term stress response detection (Fig. 1). 
The simultaneous collection of HS and TIR images in synergy with SIF data provides valu-
able insights into the response of SIF to crop stress (Camino et al., 2019; Gerhards et al., 
2019). Additionally, RGB, MS, HS, and TIR image data can be used to derive biophysical 
traits and to assist in the quantification and interpretation of plant physiological changes 
reflected in SIF measurements (Bendig et al., 2020; Siegmann et al., Zeng et al., 2021; 
2021; Wang et al., 2023b; Yang et al., 2020).
Currently, few studies are available that make synergistic use of UAV-mounted sensors 
covering different spectral domains from which guidelines or best practice protocols can 
be derived. One exception is the use of MS or HS in combination with TIR for assessing 
crop water status and estimating crop evapotranspiration (ET). This approach, with a his-
tory in airborne science research (Bastiaanssen et al., 1998), has been successfully adapted 
to UAV VIS-NIR and TIR sensors (Bellvert et al., 2021; Nieto et al., 2019). By leveraging 
the higher spatial resolution of UAV sensors, researchers have improved ET calculations by 
extracting separate surface temperatures for soil and crops, enhancing accuracy. In another 
example, Zarco-Tejada et al. (2018) employed high-resolution (40 cm) HS and TIR images, 
combined with radiative transfer model, to detect traits related to Xylella fastidiosa (XF) 
in olive trees, achieving over 80 percent accuracy in detection. Although the method sec-
tion of the above-mentioned studies describe various aspects, including leaf physiological 
measurements, image data collection and processing, RTM inversion methods, statistical 
analysis, detailed protocols and guidelines for combining multiple sensors from different 
Fig. 1   Optical sensor synergies for stress detection: different sensor combinations are useful to estimate dif-
ferent plant traits according to the period of time after plants started experiencing stress. Faded colors are 
used when the plant trait could still be measured but is less relevant than it was earlier. ETR electron trans-
port rate, ALIA average leaf inclination angle, Cab leaf chlorophyll a and b content, Car leaf carotenoids 
content, LWC leaf water content, LAI leaf area index, RGB red, green, blue, VIS visible, NIR near infrared, 
MS multispectral, HS hyperspectral, SWIR shortwave infrared, SIF sun-induced fluorescence
2617
Precision Agriculture (2024) 25:2614–2642	
spectral domains are scarce. Therefore, an integrated guideline is deemed beneficial for 
less experienced researchers to conduct similar experiments.
The guidelines that we present here are based on the collective expertise of a diverse 
group of remote sensing specialists, represented in the working group (WG3) of the COST 
Action SENSECO CA17134. They are a result of years of experience and professional col-
laboration within our group. Our aim is to enhance the synergistic use of sensors by offer-
ing recommendations and advice in situations where single-sensor protocols prove to be 
insufficient. In addition to best practice recommendations, we have gathered bad practice 
examples from our group’s experiences (see "Lessons learnt/bad examples" section), to 
help users avoid repeating them. However, guidelines, by their nature, are suggestive, not 
compulsory; they are intended to help practitioners follow some rules while allowing for 
flexibility and common sense in different scenarios.
The following outlines the structure of the paper: Data acquisition ("Pre-considerations 
on synergistic sensor use" section) data analysis ("Data analysis" section), and Lessons 
learnt / Bad Examples ("Lessons learnt/bad examples" section). In "Lessons learnt/bad 
examples" section we discuss lessons learned from selected examples that illustrate the 
loss of data or deterioration in data quality that could occur if certain preparations, installa-
tions, or rules have not been followed.
Pre‑considerations on synergistic sensor use
Acquiring image data using multiple sensors poses unique challenges that would otherwise 
be approached differently when using only a single optical sensor. Without adequate prepa-
ration, users may face difficulties that cannot be easily resolved on-site, jeopardising the 
field campaign or research project. This chapter reviews pre-considerations for data acqui-
sition with multiple sensors and briefly reviews important aspects of the process. These 
recommendations are summarized in Fig. 2 and Table 1.
Fig. 2   Overview of attention points during the data acquisition process for UAV-campaigns with multiple 
sensors. The items are described in more detail in the main text
2618
	
Precision Agriculture (2024) 25:2614–2642
Table 1   Considerations for data acquisition; GCP ground control point
Sensors
Calibration targets
GCPs
Illumination conditions
Weather station data
VIS-NIR
Gray-gradient
Black and white
Stable (fully cloudy may be 
acceptable for RGB or broad-
band)
Not mandatory
SWIR
Gray-gradient
Black and white
Direct sunlight
Recommended (water vapor)
TIR
Thermal calibration plates (warm/dry and cold/wet 
target—like a basin, dry and wet leaves, fabric)
Thermal high contrast
Direct sunlight, no wind
Highly recommended
SIF
Active/passive reference targets
Black and white or high contrast
Direct sunlight
Highly recommended
