1
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:19220  
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-46218-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Image‑based crop disease 
detection with federated learning
Denis Mamba Kabala 
1*, Adel Hafiane 
1, Laurent Bobelin 
2 & Raphaël Canals 
3
Crop disease detection and management is critical to improving productivity, reducing costs, and 
promoting environmentally friendly crop treatment methods. Modern technologies, such as data 
mining and machine learning algorithms, have been used to develop automated crop disease 
detection systems. However, centralized approach to data collection and model training induces 
challenges in terms of data privacy, availability, and transfer costs. To address these challenges, 
federated learning appears to be a promising solution. In this paper, we explored the application of 
federated learning for crop disease classification using image analysis. We developed and studied 
convolutional neural network (CNN) models and those based on attention mechanisms, in this case 
vision transformers (ViT), using federated learning, leveraging an open access image dataset from the 
“PlantVillage” platform. Experiments conducted concluded that the performance of models trained 
by federated learning is influenced by the number of learners involved, the number of communication 
rounds, the number of local iterations and the quality of the data. With the objective of highlighting 
the potential of federated learning in crop disease classification, among the CNN models tested, 
ResNet50 performed better in several experiments than the other models, and proved to be an 
optimal choice, but also the most suitable for a federated learning scenario. The ViT_B16 and ViT_B32 
Vision Transformers require more computational time, making them less suitable in a federated 
learning scenario, where computational time and communication costs are key parameters. The 
paper provides a state-of-the-art analysis, presents our methodology and experimental results, and 
concludes with ideas and future directions for our research on using federated learning in the context 
of crop disease classification.
Crop disease detection and management is an area where data science can provide valuable decision tools to 
improve productivity, reduce costs, and support development of more environmentally friendly crop treatment 
­methods1,2. Precision agriculture, which relies on modern technologies to improve productivity, has revolu-
tionized the way farmers manage their crops. One of the main goals of precision agriculture is to optimize crop 
yields while ensuring crop quality and environmental ­preservation3. This includes reducing the negative impact 
of pesticides and other plant protection products. To achieve this, it is essential to use appropriate technological 
solutions capable of automatically detecting leaf ­diseases4, which are often responsible for significant economic 
losses and reduced crop quality and yield.
Many systems have been developed for automatic detection and management of crop disease, making use of 
modern technologies such as artificial intelligence, big data, image processing, and machine learning algorithms. 
Advances in these technologies in the field of agriculture have opened up promising opportunities for early 
detection and diagnosis of crop ­abnormalities5. Deep neural networks, such as convolutional neural networks 
(CNNs) or recurrent neural networks (RNNs), as well as modern approaches based on attention mechanisms 
(e.g., Vision Transformers)6,7, are widely used, and have demonstrated outstanding performance in crop anomaly 
detection and ­diagnosis8–10.
The various machine learning algorithms used require collecting data, which is then stored on a central server 
for model training. However, collecting consistent data in large quantities is difficult, time-consuming, expensive, 
and impractical for producers. In addition, the centralized approach used to train these models presents several 
limitations, including privacy and data security issues for producers who must release their private data, limited 
availability of data for model training, regulatory constraints on data protection (such as GDPR : General Data 
Protection Regulation), prohibitive transfer costs in a context of exploding data volumes to be processed.
OPEN
1INSA CVL, University of Orleans, PRISME Laboratory EA 4229, 88 Boulevard Lahitolle, 18000  Bourges, 
France. 2INSA CVL, University of Orleans, LIFO Laboratory EA 4022, 88 Boulevard Lahitolle, 18000  Bourges, 
France. 3University of Orleans, INSA CVL, PRISME Laboratory EA 4229, 12 Rue de Blois, 45067  Orléans, 
France. *email: denis.mamba_kabala@insa-cvl.fr
2
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:19220  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-46218-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Federated learning is one promising approach to overcoming these challenges. Data used to train ML algo-
rithms can reveal unique information on production techniques, crop disease detection, and management meth-
ods, or the effectiveness of different agricultural practices. As a result, they are considered sensitive by economic 
actors, and sharing them represents a competitive risk. By enabling several entities (growers) to collaborate or 
work together to train a model without sharing private data with a central server, federated learning guarantees 
data confidentiality and security, and also makes it possible to train models in remote or rural areas. Moreover, 
by minimizing sharing of personal data and giving users control over their data, federated learning reduces the 
risk of data leakage. It then ensures compliance with data privacy regulations, such as GDPR, and furthermore 
alleviates pressure on device resources. Each participant in the federated learning process ultimately benefits 
from a more robust and efficient model trained on a richer and wider range of data, regardless of the distribu-
tion and size of each participant’s ­dataset11–13. Despite the many advantages of federated learning, a number 
of challenges remain, including complexity of coordination, data heterogeneity, effective communication, and 
prevention of malicious attacks.
In this paper, we evaluated and studied convolutional network models and models based on attention mecha-
nisms (in particular Vision Transformers, ViT) using federated learning for disease detection. We have used four 
open source image datasets from the “PlantVillage” platform for our experiments. Our goal is to highlight the 
strengths of federated learning in crop disease classification, particularly with respect to user data security and 
enforcement of confidentiality of sensitive data.
The article is structured as follows : Section "Related work" presents a state-of-the-art on crop disease detec-
tion and classification methods and federated learning. Section "Detection of crop diseases" describes the work-
ing methodology, going through the federated learning framework implemented, then the models and data 
used. Section "Federated learning (FL)" presents the results and analyses of our experiments with models in the 
federated learning approach. Finally, Section "Methodology" concludes the article by summarizing our findings 
and proposing perspectives for our future work in the context of crop disease classification using the federated 
learning approach.
Related work
In this section, we summarize agricultural research into crop disease detection using machine learning algorithms 
and the Visual Transformer. Several recent works have used these models, either jointly or individually, following 
a centralized approach to data processing. Next, we introduce the federated learning approach, mentioning major 
contributions, and summarize recent studies in the agricultural sector for crop disease detection.
Detection of crop diseases
Crop diseases, considered as an abnormal condition affecting growth, yield and quality of a plant, have been the 
subject of many diagnostic and detection approaches. In recent years, methodologies based on machine learning 
and deep learning have been developed to detect plant ­diseases6,7,14–16.
CNNs are prevalent in detecting plant diseases, as detailed in ­studies5 ­and17. ­Specifically14, employs VGG-16 
and GoogleNet on rice plants, achieving accuracies of 92.24% and 91.28% after data ­augmentation8. Uses VGG-16 
and AlexNet on tomato leaves, yielding 97.29% and 97.49% accuracy after hyperparameter ­tuning18. Introduces a 
new CNN architecture tested on various plants, outperforming several pre-trained models with accuracies up to 
99.66% and fewer ­parameters3. showcases a Deep CNN for 13 plant types, obtaining 96.46% accuracy, surpassing 
many popular models and traditional algorithms. Collectively, these works affirm the effectiveness of CNNs in 
early and accurate plant disease detection.
While CNN-based models excel in computer vision tasks, including in agriculture, they often struggle with 
capturing long-term data dependencies due to their local receptivity. The Vision Transformer (ViT) model, 
introduced ­in19, addresses this by utilizing attention mechanisms, enabling it to focus on all parts of an image 
based on their relevance. This has resulted in remarkable results in leaf disease ­detection6,7,20,21, as ViT can 
process high-resolution images, understand global context, and benefit from extensive pre-training. ­In6, the 
authors integrate a CNN with ViT for plant disease classification, showing that combining attention with CNNs 
balances accuracy with prediction ­speed7. Offers a new method using data fusion and Transformer networks for 
detecting late blight in vineyards, leveraging the synergy of diverse data like satellite images and weather data 
through three Transformers.
Considering the different works mentioned above, it is established that in the agricultural domain, CNNs 
and ViT approaches offer promising results for leaf disease treatment, identification, detection and classifica-
tion. However, all these studies are only based on a centralized approach for model training, and do not address 
the idea of a distributed approach with federated learning, which is currently considered as a solution for the 
development of more robust general models, guaranteeing data privacy and security.
Federated learning (FL)
Federated learning was introduced ­in22 as a distributed machine learning approach. Its techniques aim to train 
algorithms on decentralized devices while keeping data private at the local level. This approach contrasts with 
traditional machine learning techniques that are centralized in nature, but also with techniques based on parallel 
computing. The latter are designed to optimize computation for machine learning on multiple processors using 
a centralized dataset. Although powerful, current machine learning techniques have data privacy shortcomings 
3
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:19220  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-46218-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
because they require sharing training data with a central server, which can pose privacy, security, and regulatory 
issues related to data collection and ­sharing12,13.
In federated learning, local participants (devices) train their local models based on their own private data. 
Updates to the local models are then sent to a central server, which aggregates them through an aggregation 
algorithm to form a global ­model11. Local participants update their local models according to the global model 
and repeat this process until convergence is achieved. Depending on the application scenarios, federated learning 
can be categorized into horizontal federated learning, vertical federated learning and transfer federated learning 
[Li2020]. To ensure data privacy and security, different aggregation techniques have been ­proposed23–25.
Recent studies on federated learning, including concepts, challenges, privacy and security, and future 
research directions have been conducted ­in11,13,26. Growing steadily in recent years, federated learning has been 
applied to solve different types of problems in several domains, including ­medical27–29, distributed networks and 
­systems25,30,31, Internet of Things (IoT)32, and very recently in the agricultural ­domain33–35.
Healthcare systems have traditionally relied on centralized data sharing, which presents security vulner-
abilities. Federated learning is emerging as a solution, offering more secure data sharing between hospitals and 
preserving data confidentiality. Among recent work in this area, ­in27, the authors examine the fusion of federated 
learning, artificial intelligence (AI) and explainable AI (XAI) for smart healthcare applications. They argue that 
this combination can address many challenges in healthcare. ­In28, the focus is on the use of federated learning 
in biomedical health informatics. The authors envision a system in which various sources of health data are 
interconnected, guaranteeing data confidentiality and subsequently improving the quality of care. The ­article29 
highlights the integration of federated learning in intelligent healthcare systems, particularly for remote patient 
monitoring. They highlight the value of merging federated learning and IoT in smart hospitals, suggesting the 
training of local models on IoT devices to avoid data transfers to the cloud.
Federated learning, widely used in networks, distributed systems, and IoT due to vast data and security vul-
nerabilities, aims to ensure system functionality while minimizing attack risks. ­Paper25 introduces “FedProx”, a 
framework for network heterogeneity. ­Article30 reveals the superiority of “model poisoning” over “training data 
poisoning”. ­Study31 suggests methods to cut communication costs, ideal for bandwidth-limited devices. ­Lastly32, 
delves into federated learning’s impact on IoT, especially in smart health and transportation.
Agricultural data, dispersed over many devices, poses privacy and security challenges. Federated learning 
offers solutions to these challenges, although it’s an emerging area in agriculture. ­In33, a Privacy-Encoding-Based 
Federated Learning (PEFL) framework is introduced to enhance security in smart farming, proving efficient in 
identifying normal and attack patterns from IoT ­data35. Examines federated learning for corn disease predic-
tion, indicating the AlexNet CNN model as efficient, with a direct relation between CNN parameters and data 
exchange volume during training. Meanwhile, ­in34 a study of federated learning based on drones (or UAV: 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) for plant disease diagnosis, including classification of different types of insect pests, is 
conducted. The authors performed preprocessing and data augmentation to improve the classification accuracy, 
achieving 99.55% accuracy for all nine classes with the CNN model.
In reviewing the various works on federated learning presented above, it is clear that the agricultural domain 
remains the least explored. Of the few studies that exist to date, while they address security issues to ensure 
privacy and safety, or disease detection, many issues remain unexplored. In particular, issues related to studying 
the impact of varying the number of local devices on model performance, studying the impact of varying the 
number of local iterations or epochs on model performance, or studying the impact of varying the number of 
communication rounds or rounds between local devices and the central server on model performance. None of 
the existing work fully exploits the various popular CNN models to determine which are best suited for this new 
paradigm. Moreover, despite the successes of models based on attention mechanisms, such as Transformers in 
vision tasks, no work on the application of federated learning in the agricultural domain addresses these models. 
In this work, we study these different issues through experiments on a problem of disease classification of some 
plants, in order to provide appropriate answers.
Methodology
Federated learning framework
Federated learning is a machine learning framework in which multiple workers or clients contribute to the train-
ing of a more robust and efficient global model that they will later share while keeping their data ­decentralized11. 
Figure 1 shows an overview of the deployed FL architecture. We used open source datasets from the “PlantVillage” 
platform, and then simulate a collaborative set of clients who contribute to the improvement of a global model.
The adopted methodology, detailed in Fig. 1, is built around five essential phases. Phase 1, initialization, 
involves setting up a pre-trained model on a server that is then distributed to various pre-defined clients in the 
environment. During phase 2, local training, each client use the received model to perform local training based 
on their individual plant leaf data, this data coming from the training data subset. Then in phase 3, parameter 
transfer, in which updates to the local models, once training is complete, are sent to the central server for aggre-
gation, while all client training data are kept undisclosed on their local devices. In phase 4, model aggregation, 
the various parameters of the local models are aggregated on the central server using a chosen aggregation algo-
rithm, generating an updated global model. Finally, Phase 5, the global model transfer and local evaluation, 
involves sharing the consolidated, improved, and updated global model with the individual clients for the next 
iteration, and then evaluating it on the test data subset.
4
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:19220  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-46218-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
This five-phase cycle is repeated until the predefined number of communication rounds between the central 
server and the individual clients participating in the process is reached. Thus, in each communication round, an 
evaluation of the overall model is performed by each client on its own test data. Once the final model is ready, it 
is distributed to all clients in the environment to perform inferences. These different steps defines the behavior 
ot two main roles : the Client role (local workers) and the Server role (central federated server). Algorithms 1 
and 2 describe more formally the behavior each of these two roles.
In these two algorithms k denotes the index of C clients; Bc denotes the size of the local batches; Pk denotes 
the dataset partition for client k; Ec denotes the number of iterations performed by the local models; W denotes 
the model weights; LR denotes the local learning rate, and R denotes the number of communication rounds 
between the central server and the clients.
Client process (ClientUpdate)
This defines the behavior of the different clients in the environment, as well as how they update the initial 
and later the global model using their local data. In this process, some parameters are initially fixed, namely: 
the total number of clients C = C
i=1 ki ; the number of communication rounds R = R
i=1 ri ; the number of 
epochs Ec = E
i=1 ei ; the local learning rate LR ; and the size of local batches Bc . We therefore vary these differ-
ent parameters during our experiments in order to observe the impact of each of them in the different model’s 
performances. To do so, we perform a simulation of a collaborative set of clients who share a dataset with the 
Local Model #M1
Private data #d1
Local Model #Mn
1
2
2
3
3
3
CLIENT #1
Global Model
Central server
4
Global Model
Central server
4
3
Local Model #M1
2
Private data #d1
Local Model #M2
Private data #d2
2
Private data #dn
Local Model #Mn
2
1
1
5
5
5
Global Model
4
3
Dataset
LOCAL WORKERS
CLIENT #2
CLIENT #n
CLIENT #1
Local Model #M1
2
Private data #P1
Local Model #M2
Private data #P2
2
Private data #Pn
Local Model #Mn
2
Légende :
 Download the initial model.
 Training the initial model with local data.
 Sends local models to the central server.
 Aggregation of local models.
 Sharing the global model with clients.
1
2
3
4
5
Central server
Figure 1.   Working methodology.–We have a working environment comprising a central server for local model 
aggregation, and local workers with n clients for local model training.
5
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:19220  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-46218-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
same characteristics (consisting of healthy and infected leaves) for training and testing the model. The data 
partitioning of the dataset among the different clients is performed equally and randomly distributed. In other 
words, D = n
k=1 Pk , where D denotes the size of the dataset, with Pk(k = 1, 2, ..., n) the partition of each client, 
and P1 = P2 = ... = Pn.
Server process
This is the federated learning process that takes place at the central server. This process is essentially in charge 
of collecting the different local models and then aggregating them in order to obtain a global aggregated model 
that will be shared with the clients at the end of the communication cycle. The aggregation is achieved through 
the utilization of an aggregation algorithm. This algorithm serves as the logical mechanism at the central server 
level to merge the updates from the local models involved in the training cycle. Federated averaging is the com-
monly used approach to aggregation. The following is a non-exhaustive list of some of the more well-known 
aggregation algorithms:
•	 Federated Averaging (FedAvg) Proposed ­in22, FedAvg consists in aggregating local models by taking a 
weighted average of the weights of each model to obtain a global model. In this approach, only the model 
parameters are shared and not the raw data. This is one of the most popular federated learning algorithms.
•	 Federated Proximal (FedProx) Presented ­in25, FedProx is an improved version of FedAvg that addresses 
non-IID (Non-Identical and Independently Distributed) and data heterogeneity problems. This algorithm 
reduces the impact of devices with very different data or unbalanced data distributions.
•	 Federated Stochastic Gradient Descent (Federated SGD) This is a variant of the stochastic gradient descent 
(SGD) ­algorithm24. The federated SGD uses different weights for each of the local models based on the cor-
responding performance, and the aggregation is done by taking a weighted average. Unlike FedAvg, Federated 
SGD does not require devices to perform multiple local training epochs before sharing their model updates.
•	 Secure Multi-Party Computation Averaging (SMC-Avg) Presented ­in23, this aggregation algorithm is based 
on Secure Multi-party Computation (SMC). The idea of SMC is to allow multiple parties to compute a func-
tion on their inputs while preserving the confidentiality of the latter. In the context of federated learning, 
SMC-Avg is used to aggregate model updates securely without revealing individual device updates.
These different algorithms play a key role in any federated learning topology and aim to improve the privacy of 
local model updates. In our case, we used the federated averaging algorithm (FedAvg). The aggregation procedure 
is well described in Algorithm 2, part “Server Process”.
1: procedure UpdatesClient(k, W)
2:
BC ←(Split Pk into batch of size BC)
3:
for each local epoch i from 1 to EC do
4:
for each batch b in BC do
5:
W ←W −LR ▽ℓ(W, b)
6:
end for
7:
end for
8:
return W to Server
9: end procedure
Algorithm 1.   Client_Role
1: procedure ServerExecutes
2:
Initialize W0
3:
for each round t = 1, 2, ..., R do
4:
St ←C
5:
for each client k in St in parallel do
6:
W k
t+1 ←ClientUpdate(k, Wt)
7:
end for
8:
Wt+1 ←1
n
k
k=1 nk ∗W k
k+1
9:
end for
10: end procedure
Algorithm 2.   Server_Role
